[Amit Varma]: A quick note before you begin listening. This episode was recorded in January and was meant
[Amit Varma]: to be a timeless introduction to the world of foreign policy that you could listen to
[Amit Varma]: 30 years later and still find enlightening. I love the way the episode turned out. And
[Amit Varma]: I certainly learned a lot about the way the world functions and the motivations and incentives
[Amit Varma]: of India, Pakistan, China and the USA on the geopolitical stage. As it's a timeless episode,
[Amit Varma]: I kept the release for later. And then COVID-19 happened. Now, this episode works very well
[Amit Varma]: as it is. And I think it's excellent background to understand the world today. But the fallout
[Amit Varma]: of the pandemic does have immediate implications for foreign policy. So I have recorded a special
[Amit Varma]: segment on this with my guests, Pranay and Manoj, which is attached to the end of this
[Amit Varma]: episode at around the one hour 58 minute mark. You can skip to that if you want. But I would
[Amit Varma]: recommend listening to the whole thing in linear fashion, as this entire episode was
[Amit Varma]: packed with insight for me. Happy listening.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes it feels like the planet is going nuts. The most powerful country in the world
[Amit Varma]: is led by an orange man who posts nutty tweets at 3am in all caps. He's fighting with Iran.
[Amit Varma]: North Korea also has nukes. The Middle East is in turmoil. And no one knows what China
[Amit Varma]: wants except that you don't want to mess with China. India seems to have it all under control
[Amit Varma]: with the Prime Minister who seems to travel as often as an air hostess. But why does he
[Amit Varma]: keep talking about Pakistan all the time? At this point, you stop me and ask, Hey, Amit,
[Amit Varma]: why do we need to look outward? There is so much going wrong in India itself. Our economy
[Amit Varma]: is bungee jumping without a rope. And our society seems more and more angry at itself.
[Amit Varma]: Does the world matter? Does foreign policy matter? Why should we care?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. In today's episode, I want to take a comprehensive look
[Amit Varma]: at international relations as things stand today. How does India look at the world? How
[Amit Varma]: does the world look at India? What are our threats and opportunities? What should we
[Amit Varma]: do? What should we not do? Through what frames do we look at all of this? My guests today
[Amit Varma]: are Pranay Kotesane and Manoj Kevalramani, two outstanding thinkers who work at the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution at Bengaluru. Both of them have been guests on the show before, and I have
[Amit Varma]: learned a lot from both of them. Some of those episodes will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to the scene and the unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The scene and the unseen has been a labor of love. I've enjoyed putting together
[Amit Varma]: many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although the scene and the unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of the scene and the unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to scene unseen dot
[Amit Varma]: i n slash support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at scene unseen
[Amit Varma]: dot i n. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep the scene going. scene unseen dot
[Amit Varma]: i n slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay and Manoj, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Great to be back, Amit. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: So Pranay, you were very recently, more recently than Manoj, you were on the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen and we discussed what got you into policy and foreign policy and so on. But I
[Amit Varma]: don't think I've actually had a chance to talk about that at Manoj, though we've done
[Amit Varma]: some episodes on China, but in general, so why don't you tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: you kind of got interested in foreign policy and how it became your thing, so to say.
[Guest 1]: Oh, okay. So this has to go back like nearly two decades now. Yeah, it goes back to Bollywood
[Guest 1]: dreams being shattered, and then a choice to study IR.
[Guest 1]: You wanted to be an actor?
[Guest 1]: Of course. I was a Bombay person. I tried my hand at acting.
[Amit Varma]: Really? What movies can we see you in?
[Amit Varma]: Fortunately, none.
[Guest 2]: So Manoj tells us that those videos are not available on YouTube, but I really doubt that.
[Amit Varma]: Have you searched properly?
[Guest 2]: Yes, I have tried.
[Guest 1]: So a challenge to all my listeners, kindly find Manoj Ke Varmani videos.
[Guest 1]: I did like some of the most awesome stuff, some of the most. So, oh, as I say, in Bombay,
[Guest 1]: I had a long struggle and I went through what are called bhajan videos and I won a beauty
[Guest 1]: pageant in Bombay in my day. So yeah, so eventually after that, I sort of moved on. I ended up
[Guest 1]: going and studying IR. And when I started international relations, it just sort of switched.
[Guest 1]: I moved to journalism as opposed to foreign policy per se, but my interest was foreign
[Guest 1]: policy reportage. There was very little done in India and particularly at the grade where
[Guest 1]: I started. It took a few years once I finally went to China and I worked over there and
[Guest 1]: I came back from there. And that's when sort of the career in foreign policy, you know,
[Guest 1]: studying China sort of evolved. So that's say the last five, six years when that sort
[Guest 1]: of evolved. But that's the trajectory. I went through years of journalism, about 12 years,
[Guest 1]: most of some of them in India, three of them in China, and then subsequently moved out
[Guest 1]: of journalism because it just became a place from which I needed refuge. And therefore
[Guest 1]: I moved to research in foreign policy, particularly because that was my interest.
[Amit Varma]: And to outsiders, it seems like a very dry subject. It's almost like the grass is green
[Amit Varma]: on the other side in this context. But you know, when I speak to both of you, I get the
[Amit Varma]: sense that you really love your jobs. You really love foreign policy. Yeah. So did you
[Amit Varma]: wake up in the morning and look forward to figuring out how the dynamic changed today?
[Guest 2]: No, it's just things keep happening, right? They never let you, your guard is never down
[Guest 2]: because something or the other is happening. So you just figure out and learn something
[Guest 1]: new. Also, I think, you know, at a certain level, and I think this doesn't operate very
[Guest 1]: consciously, but for me, at least at a subconscious level, foreign policy was always sort of one
[Guest 1]: step above covering domestic stuff. It always felt like, maybe it felt like, you know, that
[Guest 1]: is much more cooler. But it also, I guess, has to do with the fact that, you know, when
[Guest 1]: you go back to studying foreign policy, just the importance that Nehru gave to foreign
[Guest 1]: policy, I think that sort of also has a sense that, you know, okay, no, this is a bigger
[Guest 1]: deal to cover. If you're really smart, you're a strategist, you do all of this. If you're
[Guest 1]: a steezy politician, you do domestic stuff. So that's the sort of stuff that I think pays
[Guest 2]: subconsciously. Yeah, no, that's a good point. Because I've heard that earlier as well. Because
[Guest 2]: when you discuss foreign policy, it allows you to escape in a sense from what happens
[Guest 2]: in the domestic policy. So it's almost an admission that things can't change locally.
[Guest 2]: So let's think of a step above. But generally, our work because we deal with public policy,
[Guest 2]: it straddles both and there is not much distinction.
[Amit Varma]: Controversial question. Is it simpler than say something like macroeconomics? Because
[Amit Varma]: I guess someone who's into macroeconomics is dealing with like millions of variables
[Amit Varma]: and everything is up in the air and it almost feels like they're winging it at times. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: for you guys, okay, it's more or less a zero sum game. And it's a few players. And actually,
[Guest 2]: no, I would say both of them are equally similar that both of them are voodoo many times. Because
[Guest 2]: in macroeconomics, unlike in microeconomics, you know, right in macroeconomics, for everything
[Guest 2]: you can give a justification. Yeah, right. Similarly, in foreign policy, also, it's the
[Guest 2]: same. Yes, people can justify anything. And there is very little of outcome irrelevant
[Guest 2]: learning. So like, if you learn something which happens goes against your belief, that
[Guest 2]: updation of your Bayesian priors happens very less in foreign policy as well, you will just
[Guest 2]: justify Oh, yeah, this thing had to happen. Yeah, Taliban went away from Afghanistan,
[Guest 2]: I knew it would happen. You know, this US went away, Russia had come in in 79, then
[Guest 2]: the US came due to balance of power changing, they went away. So there is a lot of such
[Guest 2]: things which happen in like in microeconomics and foreign policy as well. And I think one
[Guest 1]: of the reasons is that, you know, there is so much of foreign policy that links to domestic
[Guest 1]: politics and policies in other countries, that there are so many other variables and
[Guest 1]: you don't account for when you're basically looking at the state as one entity without
[Guest 1]: looking at the internal dynamics, which is something that a lot of people end up doing.
[Guest 1]: And that's where it becomes far more complicated. So yeah, what he said, I have a good example
[Guest 2]: for that, like, for example, whenever you're trying to analyse decision making of a government,
[Guest 2]: what type of models will you apply, right? The basic one which will apply is rational
[Guest 2]: actor model. So you'll treat the state as one unitary actor, which does things in certain
[Guest 2]: ways. And but that obviously is not the right model, right? You will have to understand
[Guest 2]: better models. So there are bargaining models, or there are models which look at bureaucratic
[Guest 2]: actor models, which look at how institutions within that state perform, right? But what
[Guest 2]: happens often in foreign policies, because we don't know much about the other state,
[Guest 2]: we try to analyse it as a rational actor model. So we can explain anything that China does,
[Guest 2]: for example, through this rational actor model, okay, China is doing something in Sri Lanka,
[Guest 2]: because you know, this is this, yeah, you know, it is very, that every action is calculated
[Guest 2]: as a result of something which is pursued by one actor in this state, which is not true,
[Guest 2]: right? Even in a party state like China, there will be multiple actors who are having their
[Guest 2]: own interests. So in foreign policy, also, we start off with a rational actor model.
[Guest 2]: But a great analysis only comes if you are able to improve that rational actor model
[Guest 2]: with other layers of analysis, like bureaucratic actor or bargaining. In fact, I'm reminded
[Amit Varma]: of an episode I did in the Bangladesh war with Srinath Raghavan. And a substantial part
[Amit Varma]: of that was about how the US was functioning at that time, where they were acting completely
[Amit Varma]: incoherently, because Nixon and Kissinger believed one thing and the State Department
[Amit Varma]: believed another thing. And there was a constant conflict between these. And obviously, these
[Amit Varma]: are only sort of two points. But you know, you might think you're acting with a single
[Amit Varma]: state which will act rationally, but acting with many different actors who have their
[Amit Varma]: own interests and incentives. And speaking of incentives, you know, because in your role
[Amit Varma]: as foreign policy analyst, you are expected to explain the world, is there then an incentive
[Amit Varma]: to simplify and create simplistic narratives, because the world in many ways is incredibly
[Amit Varma]: complex, you know, and not always so easy to explain, but people want bad explanations.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I think there is, there is an incentive to do that. And there is a there's also a
[Guest 1]: desire to do that, because it's easier to communicate that way. And therefore, you end
[Guest 1]: up getting stuck with some of these labels. So for example, if you look at what Chinese
[Guest 1]: have been doing with Belt and Road, the narrative of Oh, this is debt wrap, this is well thought
[Guest 1]: out imposing debt on other people to take over their sovereignty or their assets. It's
[Guest 1]: one of the simplistic narratives which has gotten hold. And as much as now you try to
[Guest 1]: sort of break that saying that look, it's not necessarily that's how that's not necessarily
[Guest 1]: how it's functioning. There are so many other complications involved. It's not easily bought.
[Guest 1]: I mean, from an analyst point of view, yes, there is an incentive to do that, because
[Guest 1]: that's your instant claim to a headline. But if that's what you desire, then you should
[Guest 1]: be doing that. But if that's not what you desire, and you want to get sort of below
[Guest 1]: the sort of surface of things, and I think it's, you know, I think that's the eventual
[Guest 1]: sort of bit that will get valued, the newspaper headline will go away within less than 24
[Guest 1]: hours insight, which is valuable sustains over a period of time. So as an analyst, that's
[Guest 1]: the choice that you end up having to make, you know, what is it that you want to do?
[Guest 1]: And I think that's why so that there exists an incentive. But there is this, I think,
[Guest 1]: for somebody who wants to understand the world, if you're going in it to try and understand
[Guest 1]: the world, I think or try and understand how foreign policy operates, you want to sort
[Guest 2]: of step back and take a look at things better. I don't think it's very different amid compared
[Guest 2]: to any other discipline. For example, in economics as well, we'll always try to simplify reality
[Guest 2]: and model reality because you want to rational actor itself in economics is a very big concept,
[Guest 2]: right? You because by making that assumption, you are able to then see outside that individual
[Guest 2]: otherwise, you will then be stuck with why is the individual doing right. So simplifying
[Guest 2]: reality and building models is the first step, right? That's how you build on to your understanding
[Guest 2]: of the world. So I think foreign policy is something similar. So you build up models
[Guest 2]: to understand the world in better ways, you will simplify things. And the hope is that
[Guest 2]: you will then apply nuance it as you understand it. But I think the difference between building
[Guest 1]: a theoretical model, which explains certain consequences and actions is different as opposed
[Guest 1]: to simplifying reality. A theoretical model will help you evaluate or filter through realistic
[Guest 1]: events to try and say, well, these are probably the underlying causes. And these are probably
[Guest 1]: the underlying motivations, whereas actually creating a narrative to simplify what could
[Guest 1]: be very complex actions don't necessarily survive. A theoretical model will survive.
[Guest 1]: I mean, things like in foreign policy, new realism and all will survive, but they will
[Guest 1]: get updated. But the theoretical base of the model will survive because it gives you one
[Guest 1]: way of looking at the world. Whereas when narratives are created, say, for example,
[Guest 1]: the US's role in the Middle East is predominantly oil driven by the big mafia, whatever, by
[Guest 1]: the big oil lobbies, those are the narratives sustain themselves, but they might not necessarily
[Guest 1]: explain foreign policy in itself. Whereas a model such as realism as an approach to
[Guest 1]: things might be able to explain to you largely why certain actions are happening and why
[Amit Varma]: states behave in a certain way. In fact, you know, the pundit economy, so to say, the talking
[Amit Varma]: heads on TV and all of that, they have to exude certainty and therefore they have to
[Amit Varma]: simplify and this happened because of this and blah, blah, blah. And there's no space
[Amit Varma]: for nuance. But however, when you're analyzing something, have you guys internalized probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: thinking and how hard or easy is that? And you know, how difficult is it to avoid the
[Amit Varma]: temptation of giving into that and just coming to a conclusion about something and moving
[Guest 2]: on? Yeah. So I don't think we have done a lot of
[Guest 2]: work on, say, probabilistic thinking because you need a lot of data to be able to also
[Guest 2]: use some of these things. But when we talk about interstate relations, you don't have
[Guest 2]: that much available. But so, for example, when we try to talk about things, we try to
[Guest 2]: avoid certainty and certitude and the ignorance that comes with certitude we try to avoid.
[Guest 2]: So we try to say even when we are predicting things, we would like to say that, you know,
[Guest 2]: these are things which are likely based on our understanding of the world and the model
[Guest 2]: that we have developed. If things go awry, then we have to update our model. That's how
[Guest 1]: we think about it. Yeah. And sort of a tangent to that is I was
[Guest 1]: recently in a Twitter discussion with somebody and we were talking about some events, controversial
[Guest 1]: stuff related to China. And the answer that I got was, well, if your answer is that it's
[Guest 1]: complex and that's not good enough, you need to have a certain clarity about it. And I
[Guest 1]: was like, but it is complex. And what are you supposed to do about that? So I think
[Guest 1]: there is like this sort of ties into what you asked earlier, right? There is a pressure
[Guest 1]: to be certain about certain things. But yeah, and the best that you can do is you can create
[Guest 1]: a model and if your model sustains the test of time, that's when you know you've probably
[Amit Varma]: done well. Let's move from certainty to clarity, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now models that you describe, frames through which you view the world in any field, useful
[Amit Varma]: because then they give clarity to the way you look at the world. And of course, if the
[Amit Varma]: frame is wrong, then your clarity could be misconceived clarity. But nevertheless, frames
[Amit Varma]: are extremely useful. So what kind of frames do you have, for example, ask each of you
[Amit Varma]: this to look at sort of the world, foreign policy, international relations?
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So this is like talking about all the models that exist in IR, but international
[Guest 2]: relations discipline itself has some theories, right? Like, so there will be a theory of
[Guest 2]: realism. So the realism theory says that the most important determinant of anything that
[Guest 2]: happens in the world is power. So it's about who has more power, the Matsya Naya thing,
[Guest 2]: which even the cotillion things, right? Big fish eats small fish. So you have to be the
[Guest 2]: big fish. If you are a small fish, you have to ally with other small fish or big fish
[Guest 2]: to in order to resist a big fish from eating.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a zero-sum view.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, yeah. So foreign policy is seen in terms of this balancing and bandwagoning. So that
[Guest 2]: is realism. And there are other frames as well. There was a liberalism school of international
[Guest 2]: relations also, which said that, you know, that this is not true. Ultimately, the goal
[Guest 2]: of all foreign policy should be to increase liberal values. And as economies get intertwined
[Guest 2]: with each other, certain kinds of values will become more popular than others. That school
[Guest 2]: was discredited with what things are happening now, right? So and then there were other constructivism
[Guest 2]: that was another view, which said that it's not necessarily that states are always going
[Guest 2]: to act like this. The ultimate decisions by states are shaped by the individuals there.
[Guest 2]: So as long as you can influence elite opinion in different countries, you might actually
[Guest 2]: achieve different outcomes. These are like three broad schools of international relations.
[Guest 2]: Now, when I look at it, apart from these things, let's look at India, right? Indian foreign
[Guest 2]: policy, the frame that we use for looking at foreign policy, the objective that we want
[Guest 2]: to think about is, is any action that we do in foreign policy, is it leading to the yoga
[Guest 2]: kshema of Indians? Which is, is it bringing, yoga kshema means peaceful enjoyment of prosperity.
[Guest 2]: So is that leading us to more yoga kshema or not? If it is not, it is a bad foreign
[Guest 2]: policy. If it is, it is going in the right direction. So, you know, we look at that.
[Guest 2]: So for example, let me give you an example where it might be controversial. So many people
[Guest 2]: say, think that territorial sovereignty or territorial integrity rather is the most important
[Guest 2]: idea of any nation state. So the view that we come from is, it's not true to say that,
[Guest 2]: you know, if yoga kshema is central to our view, there might be certain cases where you
[Guest 2]: might want to give away some territory in exchange of prosperity of more Indians. And
[Guest 2]: in fact, there exists a realistic case of that where India exchanged some land with
[Guest 2]: Bangladesh because there are these second order enclaves. Within Bangladesh, there is
[Guest 2]: India and within India, there are Bangladesh. So, and those people had, they were almost
[Guest 2]: stateless. They couldn't have any services of Indians and Bangladeshis couldn't have
[Guest 2]: services either. So we exchanged those lands. We, in fact, gave away more land than we got
[Guest 2]: in return, but that now there is consistency. Those people can have a much better life than
[Amit Varma]: they had earlier. So it is good for us. So yoga kshema is basically what Thomas Jefferson
[Guest 2]: would call the pursuit of happiness. Peaceful enjoyment of prosperity. Peaceful enjoyment.
[Amit Varma]: So peace is also important. Yeah, the means. So the means, you have the means in the end
[Amit Varma]: right there. So when you kind of think of the world, you'd once written essay for Pragati
[Amit Varma]: when I was editing Pragati about the new world order and how, and you had kind of modified
[Amit Varma]: the conventional way of thinking and added your own sort of lens to it. Tell me a little
[Guest 2]: bit about that because I found it very insightful and fascinating. Yeah. So let's look at what
[Guest 2]: this term world order means, right? So the world order, this, I'm taking this definition
[Guest 2]: from Kissinger's book by this name. So he describes the world order as a concept held
[Guest 2]: by a region or civilization about the nature of just arrangements and the distribution
[Guest 2]: of power thought to be applicable to the whole world. Okay. So this is the definition. So
[Guest 2]: if this concept is applicable to the entire world, it is called an international order.
[Guest 2]: If it applies only to a small region, it is called a regional order. Okay. So that is
[Guest 2]: what world order is. The two important words in this is just arrangements. And the second
[Guest 2]: concept is power distribution of power. Okay. So this is what the central theme of any world
[Guest 2]: order is. Okay. So basically just arrangement ties to this concept of legitimacy. Why is
[Guest 2]: legitimacy important? Because if you have a set of commonly accepted rules that define
[Guest 2]: the limits of permissible power for another state, then governing the world is easier,
[Guest 2]: right? So for example, when US propagated this idea of democracy, and now that was central
[Guest 2]: to many of their actions in foreign policy, whether it actually led to democracy or not
[Guest 2]: is a different thing, but it was in the name of democracy. So they build that concept and
[Guest 2]: because they became the most powerful nation state, all of us think in terms of that same
[Guest 2]: view, right? So now democracy, all actions of foreign policy are also seen from this
[Guest 2]: frame. So that becomes an important part. So that is about legitimacy. The second part
[Guest 2]: is distribution of power. So you will not be able to do any of these things until and
[Guest 2]: unless you have sufficient power to actually enforce things on other nations.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, isn't the notion of just therefore also determined by power balances, like the
[Amit Varma]: most powerful, especially if they are hegemonically powerful, like the USA will then define what
[Amit Varma]: is just as you are saying in the case of democracy?
[Guest 2]: Absolutely. Yeah, that's what I'm saying. That's why in my definition, great powers
[Guest 2]: don't seek just power, they seek authority. And authority is a combination of power and
[Guest 2]: legitimacy. Okay, so basically, once they achieve power, they make certain things which
[Guest 2]: are in their own benefit common across the world. So democracy, free trade, for example,
[Guest 2]: what US thought is important for them are now seen as the gold standard by a lot of
[Guest 2]: countries, right? So those became the standards against which all countries started evaluating
[Guest 2]: their own foreign policy. So that is the power of so power is important.
[Guest 2]: Power is everything, basically. In foreign, if we see the realism school of
[Guest 2]: international affairs, which I think more or less we agree to.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think more or less we agree on that. I mean, Pranay has spoken about all three
[Guest 1]: concepts and what you will see, at least in my work, what you will see is you will see
[Guest 1]: all three of them being reflected that you know, there are ways in which you can leverage
[Guest 1]: leaders, individuals, institutions within a country to shape narratives and therefore
[Guest 1]: shape states policy, there is a utility, obviously, to international institutions, not just from
[Guest 1]: a cooperative point of view, which is where sort of liberal internationalism comes into
[Guest 1]: play. But that's also where power dynamics play out. I mean, the fact that today you
[Guest 1]: have, you know, the Chinese wanting to have a specific have used UN resolutions reflect
[Guest 1]: Xi Jinping thought or something like that, or shared community of common destiny is because
[Guest 1]: they see value in it. That is how you create authority. The fact that you want to end up
[Guest 1]: having the definition of universal human rights be altered to reflect certain particularistic
[Guest 1]: conditions of each nation so that you know, I can have my own set of human rights whereas
[Guest 1]: you can have a different set is also where you want to shape sort of these norms, because
[Guest 1]: these norms also eventually determine where authority lies. And you can see this currently
[Guest 1]: being played out between the US and the Chinese. So I think that all of this sort of has very
[Guest 1]: real world implications, which is what I wanted to sort of get at is that when you apply some
[Guest 1]: of these theories in the real world, you will not necessarily see neat distinctions, the
[Guest 1]: real world is far more messy. So you'll see these things interplaying with each other,
[Guest 1]: you'll see all of this happening, but power will remain sort of central to all of this.
[Guest 1]: It is where power defined as also economic strength and that translates into military
[Guest 1]: power and the rest of it that will essentially define where you stand in the sort of global
[Guest 1]: pecking order and how much you're able to influence. And the objective of the influence,
[Guest 1]: like Rana said, is Yoko Shima. And that's from our point of view. But if I was to look
[Guest 1]: at and I study China, so if you look at from a Chinese point of view, the objective is
[Guest 1]: not necessarily Yoko Shima, the objective is broad objective is to ensure that the Communist
[Guest 1]: Party remains in power and maintains its control over so called dominance of leadership of
[Guest 1]: the Chinese people. However, you want to classify the Chinese people, not just who are in mainland,
[Guest 1]: but who are probably even overseas Chinese, who are probably even people of Chinese descent
[Guest 1]: living in places like Singapore, to have some sort of a legitimate authority to be speaking
[Guest 1]: on their behalf and governing on their behalf. And I think Yoko Shima for them is an outcome
[Guest 1]: that allows me to maintain my legitimacy, which is very different from how the means
[Guest 1]: and it's a means. So if you look at that, that's very different from how we look at
[Guest 1]: from what India's sort of foreign policy objective should be what the primary goal of our foreign
[Guest 1]: policy should be. So these can differ for different different countries in different
[Guest 1]: different states. And I think that's where sort of I would draw the distinction between
[Guest 1]: how we look at foreign policy for one state or another state and what sort of models can
[Guest 1]: be drawn. So Yoko Shima need not necessarily be for everybody. But that's what we believe
[Guest 2]: should be there for India. Actually, I mean, that's a perfect point for me to discuss a
[Guest 2]: dilemma that we face while discussing both public policy and foreign policy. So as you
[Guest 2]: know, when we are talking about the domestic sphere, we generally talk about liberalism,
[Guest 2]: pluralism, freedom of all sorts, which are close to us. But when we talk about foreign
[Guest 2]: policy, these principles don't necessarily apply. So in a sense, it is necessary for
[Guest 2]: us to maintain a cognitive dissonance. When we are talking about domestic policy, we talk
[Guest 2]: about freedom, pluralism, because that is the moral framework of our constitution and
[Guest 2]: what we want India to also be more and more free, liberal, open, etc. But that's not how
[Guest 2]: the international system operates. The international system is still Matsya Naya, what we discussed.
[Guest 2]: And hence, when we talk about international relations, we have to discuss about power,
[Guest 2]: about amorality. So this is a conflict which exists and you have to try to balance. And
[Amit Varma]: just thinking about like one, you know, reason for that, obviously, would be that from now
[Amit Varma]: from the workings of society, we know enough to know that all interactions are a positive
[Amit Varma]: sum game, which is why freedom is good and coercion is bad. And that's how societies
[Amit Varma]: progress. But foreign relations is often looked upon in most of the traditional frames as
[Amit Varma]: a zero sum game where one country will win at the expense of another. And do you think
[Amit Varma]: then that frame needs to be modified? Because honestly, all voluntary interactions between
[Amit Varma]: individuals leave both people better off. That is also the same between countries. So
[Amit Varma]: is there any way perhaps like, is it a vicious cycle of thinking in zero sum terms that if
[Amit Varma]: everyone else does it, you have to also? And is there then a way of breaking that?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, actually, people have tried to break it through, like we discussed about constructivism
[Guest 2]: and other liberalism frames, they have been applied, but they haven't stood to empirical
[Guest 2]: scrutiny, especially liberalism as a way forward in international relations, because you still
[Guest 2]: see nation states, because there is no one government, nation states doing whatever it
[Guest 2]: takes to increase their own power. And they might use that increased power for betterment
[Guest 2]: of their own people, more liberalism, freedom inside their states. But when it comes to
[Guest 2]: interstate relations, the reality has been still that it is zero sum.
[Amit Varma]: And as a complete aside, it also strikes me that I see a similar dissonance in everybody's
[Amit Varma]: lives, not between, you know, what if the policies they favor within the country and
[Amit Varma]: international relations, because most people aren't thinking about international relations,
[Amit Varma]: but simply in terms of how they think of their personal ethics, and how they think of political
[Amit Varma]: philosophy, like, for example, one passion project that I'm kind of working on, is sort
[Amit Varma]: of explain how, like, there are two important questions to which people usually have separate
[Amit Varma]: answers. And the first question is, what is a good way for me to live my life? What is
[Amit Varma]: a virtuous way for me to live my life? And the second question is, how should the state
[Amit Varma]: interact with society? And most people have separate answers to both of them. For example,
[Amit Varma]: in their personal lives, I often tell people, including leftist friends of mine that in
[Amit Varma]: our personal lives, we're all libertarian, we respect the autonomy of others, we don't
[Amit Varma]: coerce them, we respect their consent, you know, when you and I go out to a restaurant,
[Amit Varma]: we won't force each other to eat what we want that person to eat, we won't force the other
[Amit Varma]: person to pay for the meal, and so on and so forth. But it's different with the state.
[Amit Varma]: And what I have come to through many years of churn and thinking and changing my mind
[Amit Varma]: is that I view both through the same lens, which is the lens of consent and coercion,
[Amit Varma]: that coercion is bad, and you have to respect consent. And that if there is something that
[Amit Varma]: is wrong for one individual or one group of individuals to do to another, it is also wrong
[Amit Varma]: for the state to do it to you. But this is a complete tangent. And I think we got on
[Amit Varma]: the tangent because you were saying we instead of I, so I apologize for that. Let's come
[Amit Varma]: to India then, in terms of the purpose of foreign policy, what do you think it should
[Amit Varma]: be? And you guys have both articulated that you think it should be Yogakshema. But what
[Amit Varma]: has it been historically in the past? What is it today? Like, is there sort of a consensus
[Amit Varma]: on this within the foreign policy establishment? Has it been changing over time? Like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you might want to be self-aggrandizing as a nation and project power outside and
[Amit Varma]: whatever, or you could be insular like China was for the longest time and be happy as long
[Amit Varma]: as no one interferes with you. Or you could care about Yogakshema and say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: our end is the prosperity of our people, peaceful prosperity, and whatever gets us that is kosher.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how have those evolved?
[Guest 2]: So I think on the practice side of things, it does, Yogakshema has been one of the views.
[Guest 2]: So it's not articulated in that way, but prosperity of Indians and let's say that foreign policy
[Guest 2]: should actually lead to economic growth, it should help us more Indians becoming prosperous.
[Guest 2]: That is sort of been the theme of foreign policy right from independence. But there
[Guest 2]: have been other elements to it as well. Like I said, territorial integrity has sometimes
[Guest 2]: come in as an important point of view, or extending India's power to other places. Or
[Guest 2]: some people are also articulated as maintaining India's predominant position in our neighborhood
[Guest 2]: might be an important view. So there have been a mix of these ideas. But because we
[Guest 2]: are a democracy, I think this idea of foreign policy should ultimately lead to welfare of
[Guest 2]: Indians is somewhat remained common over the last 50-60 years.
[Guest 1]: I think it has remained common, but like Pranay said, there are multiple other strands. And
[Guest 1]: at least I mean, I won't necessarily go back to the 50-60s, I wasn't there. But my sense
[Guest 1]: of things at that point in time was that there was a greater interest in influencing global
[Guest 1]: events. Because that was seen, as you said, a sense of self-aggrandizement, a sense of
[Amit Varma]: we have a greater role to play.
[Amit Varma]: We matter.
[Guest 1]: We matter. And that's how we matter. Because when we sort of do these things, because you're
[Guest 1]: never going to matter with a country of, you know, hundreds of millions of really, really
[Guest 1]: poor people, it's going to take you a long, long time. So that, I think, was one objective
[Guest 1]: going back to history. I think another objective, and which I see more recently, is that foreign
[Guest 1]: policy is a tool for domestic legitimacy in terms of just popular support. The idea that
[Guest 1]: the Prime Minister over the last number of years now has gone abroad to say that, and
[Guest 1]: his supporters have gone abroad to say things like, well, have you ever seen India being
[Guest 1]: represented and spoken of so well? No, you've never seen that. And that's because of him
[Guest 1]: or his machinery. I think there's a sense that that sense of international, the glory
[Guest 1]: that you're getting internationally, the big crowds that are coming out there is going
[Guest 1]: to reflect into domestic pride and therefore votes and therefore political legitimacy.
[Guest 1]: I think that's also something that's being used now. That's not to say that it's not
[Guest 1]: necessarily that you're not looking at development of India. I mean, when this government also
[Guest 1]: came to power the first time, the objective was economic diplomacy is going to be one
[Guest 1]: of the first things. And the objective of that is to, you know, push India's development
[Guest 1]: forward. So I think there's a mix of objectives and a lot of it in the recent past, particularly
[Guest 1]: in my recollection, the recent past, I don't recollect, say, even in the 80s, through the
[Guest 1]: 90s, and even the early 2000s, Prime Minister's necessarily going abroad and using your clout
[Guest 1]: abroad, or with overseas Indians as something to sell domestically saying this is how proud
[Guest 1]: we've made you with this is how big India today is at the international stage. The argument
[Guest 1]: may have been that we have growing economy and therefore we are now big and therefore
[Guest 1]: we matter. But it was never the case of this individual makes you matter now. So therefore,
[Amit Varma]: you should be voting for them. In fact, earlier when you were talking about how you know,
[Amit Varma]: with China, it's not necessarily Yogakshema, it's a communist party over everything else.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud, it seems to me a danger that that could even be happened in
[Amit Varma]: India, where you know, if foreign validation is looked upon for, you know, as part of the
[Amit Varma]: optics that raise your brand within India itself, then that's something dangerous, it
[Amit Varma]: not need to be just it not need necessarily be at odds with, you know, what India's interest
[Amit Varma]: is. So there is, you know, one theory as to why Mr. Modi travels abroad so much, which
[Guest 2]: is to escape from the pollution of Delhi. For example, actually, the centrality of Pakistan
[Guest 2]: in India's foreign policy is a manifestation of that, right? Because ideally, in our view,
[Guest 2]: again, foreign policy should be about we should try to ignore Pakistan as much as possible,
[Guest 2]: right? Because you're not on the same level. Yeah, you're talking to a least common denominator,
[Guest 2]: then you're always going to compare yourself with Pakistan. Why would you do that? Right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, that would be defeating India's what India's wants itself to be. So as in the recent
[Guest 2]: years, what you're seeing is Pakistan, again, becoming a central part of India's foreign
[Guest 2]: policy, which it was moving away like us, for example, earlier, you if you would remember,
[Guest 2]: you whenever the US President came to Delhi, he also made a trip to Islamabad, like that
[Guest 2]: was just the normal operation. But over the last 10 years, even in the US, this had changed,
[Guest 2]: right? India and Pakistan were at different levels for the US. But now you see, again,
[Guest 2]: this idea being that we have to do things because Pakistan look at what they are doing,
[Guest 2]: because they are doing that, why can't we do it, you know, so we are comparing ourselves
[Guest 2]: with Pakistan. And that is not necessarily leading to Yogakshem of Indians, it might
[Guest 2]: lead to better prospects for a particular political party, but it might not be good
[Guest 1]: for all Indians. Yeah, the only sort of corollary that I can think of in this context in the
[Guest 1]: recent past is, so if you go back to about 10-12 years ago, there was this framework
[Guest 1]: of Chindia, where China and India rising together, we'll make Bombay into Shanghai. That's sort
[Guest 1]: of a comparison where you are trying to compare yourself. And to me, that was healthy comparison
[Guest 1]: in some ways, because you were trying to look at emulating development, at least it's aspirational.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, I mean, the idea that oh, this is where we are going. And you know, look, globally,
[Guest 1]: we're being talked about in comparison with China, and whether it's a peer now, that could
[Guest 1]: have been one way where you could sort of leverage foreign policy for domestic gain,
[Guest 1]: saying that, look, now we're in the conversation at this table. Today, that's shifted completely,
[Guest 1]: we're in a completely different table in terms of the conversation. But the idea that you
[Guest 1]: know, this comparison with Pakistan, so you spoke about the US presence previously coming
[Guest 1]: in this happening last year, when the Chinese foreign minister was supposed to come in September,
[Guest 1]: apparently, we refused him basically saying you're coming via Pakistan, and we're unhappy
[Guest 1]: with that. So come again, another time and don't come via Pakistan. Wow, that's a very
[Guest 1]: silly tantrum. Yeah. And he came in December. So, and not via Pakistan. So yeah, so I think
[Guest 1]: it's still a raw nerve internationally in that sense. But domestically, it probably
[Guest 1]: pays political dividends quite significantly. So you keep continuing to use that. So that's
[Amit Varma]: a trade off. And if you care much more about your domestic whatever than the Jogokshama
[Guest 2]: of your people.
[Guest 2]: So just one point related to that important point of peaceful enjoyment of prosperity
[Guest 2]: is economic growth, right? The growth is important. So for a long time, like Nitin and all of
[Guest 2]: us also talk about what is India's foreign policy towards us, it is 8% economic growth.
[Guest 2]: What is India's foreign policy towards Pakistan, it is 8% economic growth. Similarly, for against
[Guest 2]: many countries, it is about economic growth, right? As long as we are able to do that,
[Guest 2]: and we use foreign policy to further enhance our growth, we are on the right track. Otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: we are going in the wrong direction. And I want to elaborate on the moral importance
[Amit Varma]: of economic growth. Like if, for example, you agree that a democracy, your dharma is
[Amit Varma]: to uplift your people. Fact to remember is that every 1% rise in GDP gets 2 million people
[Amit Varma]: out of poverty, a figure which I first learned from your colleague Nitin Pai, in fact. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, there is a moral imperative to growth. Therefore, when your growth slips
[Amit Varma]: from 7% to 4%, the opportunity cost of that is 6 million people who are still in poverty
[Amit Varma]: who would not have been. How is that not something to get your blood boiling? How is that any
[Amit Varma]: less than, you know, the other humanitarian crimes carried out by this regime or that?
[Guest 2]: Totally agree. So that's why when we talk about foreign policy, it is with this frame,
[Guest 2]: right? Let's talk about growth and how we can use foreign policy to increase our prospects
[Amit Varma]: and bring prosperity for all Indians. So I have a question about India, which is that
[Amit Varma]: however, foreign policy may sometimes be used as a tool of optics by the party in power.
[Amit Varma]: Is it basically fundamentally run by a deep state kind of apparatus in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: is it just the dip, your external affairs ministry or whatever, where they have their
[Amit Varma]: carders and they have everything and they run it and therefore policy will be more or
[Amit Varma]: less consistent and stable through different political regimes. And, you know, politicians
[Amit Varma]: may use foreign policy for a little window dressing here and there, but it's really the
[Amit Varma]: deep state which is handling things. For example, exemplified perhaps by the appointment of
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Jaishankar who's, you know, a career foreign affairs bureaucrat who is now in charge of
[Amit Varma]: the external affairs ministry at the time of recording this on Jan 24. It's a strange
[Amit Varma]: world one never knows. So is that the case or do politicians have a greater impact? No,
[Guest 2]: I would say I'll give a few examples to illustrate, right? Just look at what Manmohan Singh's
[Guest 2]: government did with the U.S. on the nuclear deal, right? They staked their government's
[Guest 2]: position for that particular foreign policy action and it did have rewards, right? That
[Guest 2]: single decision led to India and U.S. relations being taken to a different level. So political
[Guest 2]: will, political decision making matters a lot, just like in any other foreign policy.
[Guest 2]: So basic tenets might remain the same, just like in economic policy, broadly everyone
[Guest 2]: in the government also realizes that economic growth is important. But how would you want
[Guest 2]: to reach that economic growth differs, right? This government is increasing import duties
[Guest 2]: in the hope of saying that growth will be important. Which is bizarrely ignorant. So
[Guest 2]: the actual practice might in fact be very different. So even in foreign policy, that's
[Guest 2]: the case. So even though people recognize that the ultimate goal is more prosperity
[Guest 2]: for Indians, but the practice is different and that depends on the political will, what
[Guest 1]: the government of that day and age thinks. So I mean, I think if you go back to history
[Guest 1]: and if you look at it, when India became independent, the political class obviously had the dominant
[Guest 1]: role in foreign policy making. I mean, Nehru ran India's foreign policy. Over time, obviously,
[Guest 1]: the bureaucracy develops and the bureaucracy gets institutionalized in certain values,
[Guest 1]: in certain sense of what our interests are and what our approaches are. Subsequently
[Guest 1]: making sort of pivoting is very difficult because that's where I think sort of deep
[Guest 1]: state in the sense sort of fixes in. And if you look at, if you listen to former bureaucrats,
[Guest 1]: former IFS folks, former ambassadors, you get that sense that there is a certain viewpoint
[Guest 1]: that they come from and to take some of those leaps and one of the leaps was what Pranay
[Guest 1]: mentioned, which was the nuclear deal. It was a very, very difficult process to go through
[Guest 1]: that and there's a lot of not just political, but also bureaucratic sort of pushback against
[Guest 1]: something like that. But that's made and that's again where the political class sort of intervenes.
[Guest 1]: I think today what you see is that there is an institutionalized sense and I think this
[Guest 1]: has to go back to the nuclear deal in that period of time over 10-12 years now. The sense
[Guest 1]: that, actually not even 10-12 years ago, I think this goes back to the late 90s after
[Guest 1]: we conducted the nuclear tests and the subsequent dialogue. Again, this is a political level
[Guest 1]: dialogue happening between Stuart Talbot and Juswan Singh and that shapes narratives.
[Guest 1]: And then it takes us still about 10 years after that to do this nuclear deal, finalize
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But the dialogue happened through regimes, which is interesting.
[Guest 1]: The dialogue began with Juswan Singh and Stuart Talbot and that was the dialogue with sort
[Guest 1]: of normalized things, which is when Bill Clinton visited India in 2000. After that, and that
[Guest 1]: was a big deal, right? Sanctions were placed against India and then Bill Clinton comes
[Guest 1]: to India eventually. Subsequently, it takes about five years where we end up announcing
[Guest 1]: this possibility of a nuclear deal. And even this possibility of the nuclear deal in the
[Guest 1]: US, there is a pushback because this is George Bush wanting to do it and us taking on the
[Guest 1]: opportunity with that. But there is a pushback in the US also, which led to therefore that
[Guest 1]: 1-2-3 agreement going through such a long discussion. Even in India, there is resistance
[Guest 1]: and that's why it takes you eventually so long. When you reach the agreement, subsequently,
[Guest 1]: if you see whatever subsequent governments have sort of felt, whatever sort of the environments
[Guest 1]: have been, there have been certain sort of constants in how we've approached it. We've
[Guest 1]: moved closer to the US, we've tried to balance the Chinese and we've tried to also figure
[Guest 1]: out a way where we can maintain economic growth in whatever way we can. And that's been sort
[Guest 1]: of broadly our priorities without trying to get too controversial. We've tried to sort
[Guest 1]: of keep somewhere equidistant where we don't get caught up in controversies, managing our
[Guest 1]: relationship with Iran and the US pressure on Iran and all those things. To me, part
[Guest 1]: of that is political. But part of that is also how the bureaucracy sort of seeks stability
[Guest 1]: because certain values get entrenched, certain opportunities, certain senses get entrenched.
[Guest 1]: And then it's very difficult. You need something where the political establishment sort of
[Guest 1]: pushes hard, bangs on heads and then you sort of push through something which can be transformative.
[Guest 1]: So if today you were to ask somebody who feels that India must pivot, the world is changing
[Guest 1]: drastically, India must pivot towards some sort of an alliance with the US, you will
[Guest 1]: find a lot of inertia within the bureaucracy. You will find a lot of former ambassadors
[Guest 1]: and bureaucrats saying, no, no, no, that's going too far. We can talk, we can do this
[Guest 1]: and we can sort of find some sort of a modus vivendi, but we don't necessarily want to
[Guest 1]: go down that road. And that's because you're institutionalising certain thought processes
[Guest 1]: about risk taking, about where our interests lie and how our interests are sort of being
[Guest 1]: shaped by the events. But you won't necessarily anticipate it because you're institutionalising
[Guest 1]: those things. So I think there is a deep state which gets entrenched over a period of time.
[Guest 1]: There are points of time in India's history where politicians have sort of dominated this
[Guest 1]: particular foreign policy framework. Yet I think for in much of post Nehruvian era, it's
[Guest 1]: been the bureaucracy which has driven things. There have been moments where the politicians
[Guest 1]: have sort of taken charge, but much of the time it's I think it's a bureaucracy that's
[Guest 1]: maintained things the way they are.
[Amit Varma]: So would it be fair to say that there is therefore a status quo bias at play that among bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: that the safest thing is to do nothing because nothing can go wrong and you can't be blamed
[Amit Varma]: for doing, you know, the usual whatever it is that you do. And therefore, if any drastic
[Amit Varma]: actions or big changes from the past have to be done, they have to necessarily come
[Amit Varma]: from politicians.
[Guest 2]: Yes, I would agree with that. So there is a very famous quote in international which
[Guest 2]: gets misused a lot is about there are no permanent friends or enemies, only permanent interests.
[Guest 2]: Now let me corrupt it further and say that interests are semi-permanent. Okay, the interests
[Guest 2]: also change but they are semi-permanent. So that's why you will see the status quo bias
[Guest 2]: in the sense that largely interests of India across these have also remained the same and
[Guest 2]: they have changed not with every government, but they have changed over say 20-30 years
[Guest 2]: because you know, your interests will change if, when will they change? When your entire
[Guest 2]: power in the international order also changes, right? Let's say if you have acquired more
[Guest 2]: economic power or more military power, you have that many more instruments to achieve
[Guest 2]: something, right? Let's say you want to ensure that Indians who are working in the Gulf are
[Guest 2]: protected. But if you don't have a Navy to back that up, there's not much you can do.
[Guest 2]: You will do status quo. You will just say, okay, have good relations with all countries
[Guest 2]: in West Asia, balance all of them. Yeah, but that's pretty much it, right? But now imagine
[Guest 2]: India is a much more powerful country in terms of the economic wherewithal and also in terms
[Guest 2]: of military strength, then we can deploy things there. We can also have relationships with
[Guest 2]: other countries, which will ensure that in times of emergency, Indians are repatriated
[Guest 2]: in a much better way, right? So the dependence is on our own power. And if we have more power,
[Guest 2]: it might not necessarily be status quo. We can do many more things. We can deliver pain
[Guest 2]: to countries which act against us. And we can also provide benefits to countries which
[Guest 2]: act according to us.
[Amit Varma]: And what also strikes me here is that using the realist frame and putting power at the
[Amit Varma]: center of everything means that India is playing multiple games at the same time. Like on one
[Amit Varma]: hand, you have the US as this large power, and India has a history of not being particularly
[Amit Varma]: close to them during the Cold War and so on. So, you know, there is this constant game
[Amit Varma]: you're playing where you're trying to sort of maintain national pride, but also get closer
[Amit Varma]: to them and make them friendlier towards you. And at the same time, within the region, you
[Amit Varma]: are the big boy in South Asia, and you want to sort of use that to consolidate your influence.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you're very aware that China is doing things in your neighborhood
[Amit Varma]: in the Indian Ocean. And you also have therefore the imperative of at least balancing that
[Amit Varma]: and looking after your interests. How is Indian thinking on all of these and we can go one
[Amit Varma]: by one and not necessarily try to do a broad sweep one by one. If we talk about our attitude
[Amit Varma]: towards the USA, towards China, towards the region, how has that sort of evolved over
[Amit Varma]: the last 20-30 years?
[Guest 2]: So, let's look at US first, probably. So, on the US, there was this article that an
[Guest 2]: interview that K Subramaniam gave for Pragati itself long back, where he articulated that
[Guest 2]: if the world is going to be such that US is the number one and China is number two in
[Guest 2]: the world, it is in India's interest to ensure that US is number one. So, that was sort of
[Guest 2]: his articulation. But so, broadly, Indian foreign policy has taken that trend that US
[Guest 2]: is important, even though there is very strong anti-Americanism in our, because of our previous
[Guest 2]: history, Cold War, closeness with Russia and all that. But look at India, right? Our median
[Guest 2]: age is 27. Most of the people are born after liberalization. So, and we all have had, you
[Guest 2]: know, even at a cultural level, US has been close, right? Many people in Bangalore have
[Guest 2]: worked for US companies, including me. So, there is that anti-Americanism, I think is
[Guest 2]: slowly fading away. And that is a recognition from the US side as well, because the US game,
[Guest 2]: big game is US is worried about China. And it realizes that to counter China, it needs
[Guest 2]: a player, a middle power, which is of significant strength, which at the current stage only
[Guest 2]: is India. So, now you see a convergence of both US wanting, seeing India at a different
[Guest 2]: level than other players like Pakistan. And India also moving away from that anti-American
[Guest 2]: attitude, which existed 20-30 years ago. So, over the last 10 years, there has been more
[Guest 2]: convergence and US-India relationships have been much better than they were 20-30 years
[Amit Varma]: ago. And is there a sort of balancing to be done
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that we also want good relations with China? But is there a sort of balancing
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that if they see us get too close with the US, they might get pissed off?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I mean, so there was a news report last week, which spoke about a Trump staffer, I
[Guest 1]: think it was Scaramucci, but I can't remember which Trump staffer, but a former Trump staffer
[Guest 1]: essentially saying that when Modi met Trump, Trump asked him, Trump, they were talking
[Guest 1]: about China and Trump sort of made a remark saying, it's not like China is next to you,
[Guest 1]: right? It's not like it's on the border with you. So, it is on the border with us, of course.
[Guest 1]: And so, it's not just the fact that China is a large neighbour, which is next to us,
[Guest 1]: which enjoys a massive asymmetry with us. China's per capita GDP today is over $10,000,
[Guest 1]: five times more than ours. Its capacity to use its economic resources to create military
[Guest 1]: power is far, far superior than ours. So, it enjoys a massive asymmetry from us. Secondly,
[Guest 1]: we've got this long pending border dispute, which continues to be an irritant. Thirdly,
[Guest 1]: China is one of our biggest trading partners. Our trade with the Chinese is today at $92,
[Guest 1]: $93 billion a year. There's increasing Chinese investment coming in India. So, that's an
[Guest 1]: opportunity. In the last three, four years, there's been about $9, $10 billion worth of
[Guest 1]: Chinese investment coming in, largely in India's tech sector. But apart from that, also in
[Guest 1]: construction and other things. So, there's an opportunity that it presents, but there's
[Guest 1]: also a threat that the Chinese present, which is the fact that they are not just an asymmetrically
[Guest 1]: large neighbour sitting next door to us with a border dispute from us. They also have a
[Guest 1]: very close relationship with Pakistan, which is a fundamental irritant for India in its
[Guest 1]: trajectory to grow further. And there's long standing hostility with the Chinese have sort
[Guest 1]: of furthered by helping develop Pakistan's weapons, nuclear industry. And it's furthering
[Guest 1]: that also right now, because it's also investing in Pakistan's Navy right now. And as that
[Guest 1]: sort of develops, it creates more problems over India. Because, I mean, everybody remembers
[Guest 1]: the Masood Azhar saga, where the Chinese constantly supported Masood Azhar's, the not listing
[Guest 1]: of Masood Azhar as a UN designated terrorist. So, there are these fundamental contradictions
[Guest 1]: that we have with China. There's an opportunity there and there's a threat there. And my sense
[Guest 1]: is that what we should be doing and what we are trying to do, although we're not necessarily
[Guest 1]: doing as well as we could have, is to try and not just balance it in terms of our relationship
[Guest 1]: with America, and also trying to invest in our domestic capacities, because that's fundamentally
[Guest 1]: what is going to be needed to deter the Chinese. So, this is a four step thing that we need
[Guest 1]: to do. We need to engage with them. We don't necessarily engage with them well. Our engagements
[Guest 1]: have been, at leader levels, yes, we do engage. You know, before even Modi was meeting Xi
[Guest 1]: Jinping for informal summits and sipping coconuts, you know, there were meetings between Indian
[Guest 1]: leaders and Chinese leaders. I mean, Manmohan Singh and Hu Jintao met a number of times
[Guest 1]: and that's when sort of the big bonhomie was happening. So, that's one thing. But also
[Guest 1]: at sort of society levels, governmental levels, institutional levels within governments, at
[Guest 1]: different levels, we need to be engaging with them because we don't necessarily understand
[Guest 1]: how that system operates. And a classy example is the engagements at our armed forces. The
[Guest 1]: fact that India and China have been talking about setting up a hotline, a crisis de-escalation
[Guest 1]: hotline between the armed forces for years now, at least publicly this government said
[Guest 1]: so two years ago. And it just announced this month that we are in a position where a hotline
[Guest 1]: will be set up. And the reason that you couldn't set this hotline up is because India said,
[Guest 1]: we have the Director General of Military Operations, that person will be in charge. Who is your
[Guest 1]: equivalent at that side? And neither could we, neither could they identify the equivalent.
[Guest 1]: So just this sort of sense of lack of understanding of each other's systems and sort of being
[Guest 1]: able to harmonise that. So, we need to engage with them. We also need to balance them, which
[Guest 1]: is what we are doing with the US, which is what we're doing when we partner with Japan,
[Guest 1]: with Australia, this idea that we are building up this quadrilateral group, which is not
[Guest 1]: an alliance, but some sort of a loose coming together of like-minded countries. Most important
[Guest 1]: to this is not the fact that we have these countries working with us, but the fact that
[Guest 1]: we work with them to develop our own capacity, our own military capacity. And we're sort
[Guest 1]: of gradually taking steps to do that. In terms of deterrence, the capacity building will
[Guest 1]: work. Nuclear weapons are an important part of the deterrence, but also the fact that
[Guest 1]: we need to be able to bolster our border defences, we need to be able to build infrastructure,
[Guest 1]: we need to be able to spend on our Navy. And for all of this, our economy is fundamental.
[Guest 1]: And the last bit over there, in terms of this framework of engagement, balancing, deterrence
[Guest 1]: is collaboration. And that's where I sort of tie in the economy. The Chinese today are
[Guest 1]: massively capital rich, they want to spend money, they want better returns. India can
[Guest 1]: potentially offer a market where they can get better returns. We've not been able to
[Guest 1]: attract the kind of investment, although there's 8 and 9 billion that I've said about, but
[Guest 1]: there's much more investment from the Chinese that could come into dummy infrastructure,
[Guest 1]: which hasn't come in. They're doing this around the world, but they're not doing this in India.
[Guest 1]: We should be trying to attract that money in, and that requires regulatory clarity in
[Guest 1]: India. So that's where we need to collaborate with them, not just on infrastructure, but
[Guest 1]: also maybe on say digital technologies, talking to them about cyber governance and these sorts
[Guest 1]: of things, talking to them about data protection, which are all going to be norms which are
[Guest 1]: going to be shaped internationally. And we need to work with them on these things to
[Guest 1]: be able to collaborate where we can, leverage what we can to be able to then build our capacity
[Guest 1]: and deter them. So yes, while we build our relationship with the US, this is a neighbor
[Guest 1]: on our border, which we need to manage well. And this is a framework through which we can
[Guest 2]: manage them.
[Guest 2]: I just want to tie that into the US-India question. So broadly, the way I see it as
[Guest 2]: India's US relationship, there are three schools of thought. One is purely a retaliatory school
[Guest 2]: of thought, which says, why should India do anything to the US because US keeps supporting
[Guest 2]: Pakistan still. It still supports the Pakistani military. It gives F-16s to them and all that.
[Guest 2]: So that's a retaliatory school in nature. It is very low on realism because it is not
[Guest 2]: taking into account what US can do to India, the benefits it can give. That is one school
[Guest 2]: of thought. The second school of thought is purely bandwagoning, which I told you about
[Guest 2]: that we should try to ensure that India, if US is the number one and China is number two,
[Guest 2]: US should be number one. We should try to prolong that. The third school of thought
[Guest 2]: is what Manoj was talking about and what we sort of believe in about India trying to be
[Guest 2]: a swing power. Basically, India's capability should be that it should be able to deliver
[Guest 2]: pain to an adversary if it does not act according to our interest, and it should be able to
[Guest 2]: deliver benefits if it does. So that is how we should look at US and China as well. And
[Guest 2]: so issue by issue, we can decide where we want to be on. So it is called like another
[Guest 2]: analogy for this is we shouldn't be in anyone's camp, but we can be in different tents at
[Guest 2]: different times. So you could be on, for example, on climate change, India could have more close
[Guest 2]: relationship with China. But on certain other things, US is more important for India. So
[Guest 2]: it requires a balance. We don't need... India is a big enough power to be able to do that.
[Guest 2]: If you ask this question to a small nation state, it's very tough for them to do any
[Guest 2]: of this balancing because their own power is less. But because India is a significant
[Guest 2]: power, and we hope it remains so with growing economic strength, then its ability to do
[Guest 2]: this balancing, be in different tents at different times will improve over time. And it also
[Amit Varma]: strikes me when you were talking about deterrence against China, it also strikes me that perhaps
[Amit Varma]: a stronger deterrent than say nuclear bombs is a strong economy, because then their incentives
[Amit Varma]: because you know, they make so much money from our economy that their incentive is to
[Amit Varma]: keep us healthy, but that doesn't work for Pakistan. So while we need carrots with China,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps these kind of positive some carrots, we need sticks with Pakistan, would that be
[Guest 1]: a fair characterization? So I'd say that we need a bit of both with China, we need to
[Guest 1]: be able to have the capacity and display the resolve to be able to inflict pain, but we
[Guest 1]: need carrots because it is beneficial to us also. And the fact that over the last 60-65
[Guest 1]: years, we've been able to manage the border tensions without any major incidents, the
[Guest 1]: Chinese have not sort of protruded inside India, they've not even sought to, there have
[Guest 1]: been differences, which cause incursions and those sorts of things. But there's nothing
[Guest 1]: that that's been large scale. And there's nothing that tells us that there will be something,
[Guest 1]: you know, at a massive scale going forward. Likewise, with India, India has not tried
[Guest 1]: to push through sort of established lines apart from, I mean, as much as we keep reporting
[Guest 1]: Chinese border incursions, they do the same thing, Indian border incursions. So that's
[Guest 1]: a perceptual issue. And that happens. Yes, there's also it's but the fact is that it's
[Guest 1]: also a pain point for us, which the Chinese tend to leverage also. So it's not just innocent
[Guest 1]: perception. It's also thought out sort of approach to this. In terms of carrots, yes,
[Guest 1]: we need carrots. I think this is one place where sort of we in the office tend to have
[Guest 1]: a discussion about is that can these carrots influence Chinese policy? What evidence has
[Guest 1]: shown us that in certain cases, it can in certain cases, it won't. So for example, when
[Guest 1]: the Chinese ended up entering into a sort of conflict with the Japanese, this phase
[Guest 1]: of tension starting from 2012 onwards, over the disputed islands between the two countries,
[Guest 1]: you ended up realizing that the Chinese were willing to bear economic costs, whether it
[Guest 1]: was to Japanese businesses in China, or whether it was sort of dealing with cutting off ties,
[Guest 1]: sort of restricting hurting Chinese exports and all those sorts of things. They were willing
[Guest 1]: to deal with economic costs. In the case of the US right now, and sort of tensions between
[Guest 1]: the Americans and the Chinese, what you're seeing is that they're again willing to bear
[Guest 1]: economic costs for strategic objectives. Yet, when those economic costs start to hurt the
[Guest 1]: stability of the party, that's when it becomes far more important. So it might not necessarily
[Guest 1]: be a case where a certain large, certain set of large industry sort of lobbies can get
[Guest 1]: together and influence the government in China, like they could probably in the US or probably
[Guest 1]: in India, to alter policies, soften policy or do something like that. But when those
[Guest 1]: industries are critical to survival for the Communist Party, you'll end up seeing them
[Guest 1]: sort of altering course, it might not just be sort of the profit margins being hurt badly.
[Guest 1]: So I think that is what we need to keep in mind when we try to take, if our carrots are,
[Guest 1]: the purpose of the carrots is to sort of try and shift policy over a period of time, it
[Guest 1]: has to be focused with sort of very clear sort of precision that what are you looking
[Guest 1]: at, where are you targeting, it might not necessarily be sufficient just because you're
[Guest 1]: a large enough market where you can, where they are making 100 billion dollars a year,
[Guest 1]: that might not essentially be sufficient. So there may be a lot more that needs to be
[Guest 2]: done.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I look at it from like an insurance policy, right? You need an insurance when
[Guest 2]: things go wrong, right? Similarly, I articulate what India's policy towards China should be
[Guest 2]: in two parts. One is what Manoj said about part one, we need Yogakshema, it's in our
[Guest 2]: national interest that there are more investments, there is peace on the border. So whatever
[Guest 2]: requires to be done with China on that we should do, we should allow Chinese investments
[Guest 2]: in a lot of at least the dump infrastructure in India, definitely a yes, right? But we
[Guest 2]: also need an aggressive China insurance policy. So what if, because China's recent movements
[Guest 2]: have been in Maldives, Nepal, Doklam are quite indicative that it is ready to take openly
[Guest 2]: hostile relationship with its neighbors, not just India, it has been the case with many.
[Guest 2]: So we need at least some instruments to be able to deliver pain to China if it tries
[Guest 2]: this, right? So for example, some things, the insurance premium for this policy would
[Guest 2]: include a variety of measures, for example, establishing at least contacts with key members
[Guest 2]: of the World Uyghur Congress, for example, because that is a pain point for them. Shifting
[Guest 2]: the focus of our Act East and Look East policy to just one country, Vietnam, for example,
[Guest 2]: because it is a country which also has a historic problem with China in its neighborhood. Third,
[Guest 2]: offering Trump deals that can actually deepen the US-India engagement. And fourth, actually
[Guest 2]: sponsoring studies that puncture the Chinese leaders do no wrong narrative, because that's
[Guest 2]: a very strong thing. Everything in China is planned and everything they do is a success.
[Guest 2]: Dear leader is never wrong, sounds familiar, Indian listeners. So these are just, this
[Guest 2]: is not a comprehensive list by any means, but these are some things which we can develop
[Guest 2]: our strength in so that if things go wrong with China, we at least have well-developed,
[Guest 1]: crafted instruments. Yeah, I think the only, the one thing that I would add to this is,
[Guest 1]: you know, our relationship with Taiwan. The fact that we've not really been able to leverage
[Guest 1]: that relationship at all, which apart from just as an insurance policy with regard to
[Guest 1]: China is also useful from the point of view of our own technological development. Given
[Guest 1]: that we want to talk about indigenizing semiconductors and all of that, we need to work with the
[Guest 1]: Japanese. And I don't think we've done enough. I mean, I, we just had elections in Taiwan
[Guest 1]: and for whom I had put out on social media that it would be nice to see the Indian government
[Guest 1]: put out a statement saying that, you know, congratulations, well, you know, good elections
[Guest 1]: and you know, congratulations on peaceful transfer of power and just as generic as that,
[Guest 1]: without even using the word president side, because we don't recognize Taiwan as a state,
[Guest 1]: but just congratulating them. When the Australians can, when the Americans can, why can't we?
[Guest 1]: It might, it will urge the Chinese, of course, it'll urge the Chinese, but it won't take
[Guest 1]: you for granted. Yeah, they won't take you for granted. So I don't see why we don't do
[Guest 1]: that and why we've also sort of become far more soft on Tibet. These are complicated
[Guest 1]: issues for the Chinese that are going to remain complicated for the next, at least for the
[Guest 1]: next decade plus. Taiwan's going to be there for a longer period of time, but given that
[Guest 1]: the Dalai Lama is aging and his health hasn't been the best, Tibet's going to be a complicated
[Guest 1]: issue for the Chinese. I don't know how much we've done to sort of nurture some of these
[Guest 1]: pain points. I don't think we've done sufficient. In fact, what we've done in the last few years
[Guest 1]: is that we've actually rolled back some of the pressure that we apply on this. So when
[Amit Varma]: you say nurture the pain points, you're saying keep it alive as an issue. Yes. So they are
[Amit Varma]: wary of messing too much with you on other fronts because you could mess with them on
[Guest 1]: this front, basically. To me, the fact is that the fact that we are no longer even issuing
[Guest 1]: statements to any regard tells you of the fact that you, I mean, I don't know what capacity
[Guest 1]: we'd have in Tibet, if we have any, I don't. The fact that we are no longer even talking
[Guest 1]: about it tells you that we probably have no capacity. If you had some capacity, you would
[Guest 1]: talk about it because empty talk is otherwise useless. So I presume that we've not nurtured
[Guest 1]: that capacity. And if you've not done that, therefore we're not talking. So I think we
[Guest 2]: should be looking to do some of these things. Actually, we're going the other direction,
[Guest 2]: because Pakistan has become again important for this government. The opportunity cost
[Guest 2]: of that is that we are not going to be looking at China with such, with all these instruments.
[Guest 2]: We're not going to develop them. In fact, we are going to need China on our hand to
[Guest 2]: take on Pakistan. And for just the case of that Masood Azhar listing is a classic case
[Guest 2]: because it is so important to us. We want China's support for that delisting and all
[Guest 2]: cannot happen. So we are going in the other direction by making Pakistan the focus of
[Amit Varma]: our foreign policy. And we shall make Pakistan the focus of our conversation after we come
[Amit Varma]: back commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is a selfish gene by Richard Dawkins. This is a landmark
[Amit Varma]: book of popular science writing that explains how natural selection functions through the
[Amit Varma]: medium of genes. It's an eye opening book. And if you're not familiar with the subject,
[Amit Varma]: the world will never look the same after you're done with this. So do check it out in Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: The selfish gene by Richard Dawkins. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember
[Amit Varma]: that Storytel with a single l Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Pranay Kutasane and Manoj Keval
[Amit Varma]: Romani on foreign policy. And we've sort of been talking about how India looks at first
[Amit Varma]: the US and then China, and now Pakistan. And Pranay, I remember a couple of years back,
[Amit Varma]: if my memory serves me right, we actually did an episode on why China's renewed interest
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan could actually be a good thing for India and not a threat.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, we did that with regards to what China was doing in CPEC, etc. Yeah, I remember that.
[Guest 2]: So my thing about Pakistan and India's relationship with Pakistan is, yeah, we need to move away
[Guest 2]: from what we are doing, move away from that focus and defocus, actually, Pakistan, even
[Guest 2]: when we are talking about the subcontinent. So there are, for example, Bangladesh is a
[Guest 2]: country we should be really investing our subcontinent policy for, right? All our energy
[Guest 2]: should be that because it is a big country. It has, it is our largest export for our two-wheeler
[Guest 2]: market now, for example. And there are a lot of tourists which come from Bangladesh to
[Guest 2]: India, a significant number. The economy is also doing much better than us. The per capita
[Guest 2]: GDP is more than that of Pakistan now. So there are lots of good things. And we need
[Guest 2]: Bangladesh because we need to be able to, the connectivity between India's northeast
[Guest 2]: part and the other parts of India is quite weak. And we need Bangladesh to help us get
[Guest 2]: through Bangladesh to say Mizoram and Tripura. And Bangladesh is very important. We have
[Guest 2]: done trials also of moving goods through that. So Bangladesh is important. So actually, my
[Guest 2]: thing about Pakistan is just keep an eye on the Pakistani military jihadi complex, which
[Guest 2]: we have spoken about. And as long as we have enough capability to avert the worst things
[Guest 2]: that Pakistani military jihadi complex does to us, the foreign policy idea should think
[Guest 1]: of other things and not Pakistan. I agree with that completely. I'm just going to slightly
[Guest 1]: rephrase it. I think our security policy can deal with Pakistan because I mean, when you
[Guest 1]: engage with folks in the Indian armed forces, the one thing that they'll tell you is that
[Guest 1]: we get that we need to reorient towards China. The new army chief says we are doing some
[Guest 1]: sort of rebalancing and the balancing is to correct historical issues where we are balancing
[Guest 1]: towards the northern frontier. Yet when you engage with people in the armed forces, what
[Guest 1]: they'll tell you is that, what do you do? There's a constant barrage from that side.
[Guest 1]: So how do you sort of reorient? It's a difficult thing to reorient. Conceptually, it makes
[Guest 1]: sense to us also, but how do you do it practically? So, and I think the difference there is that,
[Guest 1]: you know, you get your security policy needs to take into account what you need to do to
[Guest 1]: deal with the threats that emerge from the military jihadi complex. The problem is when
[Guest 1]: that gets transported into your domestic narrative, into your foreign policy priorities, and that
[Guest 1]: starts to defeating or achieving petty diplomatic victories, which really are of no consequence.
[Guest 1]: And I put Masood Arz's listing in that particular category for probably domestic purposes. It
[Guest 1]: really makes no sense. The fact that we are investing that much foreign policy capital
[Guest 1]: in these things and diplomatic capital, which is terribly limited. I mean, India's diplomatic
[Guest 1]: core is very limited. The amount of money that we spent on our diplomacy is very limited
[Guest 1]: compared to the Americans, the Chinese, the folks that you want to be compared with, you
[Guest 1]: know, the folks with whom you want to be playing this great game, are sort of 10-15 times more
[Guest 1]: spending more than you, their capacity is far greater than you. And you're wasting your
[Guest 1]: limited capacity on something as petty as this, which is not really going to get you
[Guest 1]: any significant tangible outcomes. That's where I think the problem lies. So as a security
[Guest 1]: policy, yes, you need to reorient your armed forces in a certain way, you need to make
[Guest 1]: sure that you have the capacity to deal with the threats that emerge. But from a foreign
[Guest 1]: policy perspective, you need to be looking at something far broader, of which say things
[Guest 1]: like Bangladesh, of which say things like, if you're worried about the Chinese having
[Guest 1]: greater influence in your neighborhood, what exactly are you doing about it? What sort
[Guest 1]: of connectivity project, if connectivity is what they're selling, and if you're saying
[Guest 1]: that your neighborhood is worried about an infrastructure deficit, and that's what they're
[Guest 1]: selling, you might not meet them dollar for dollar, but you have other advantages, you
[Guest 1]: can work with other partners, you've tried to. But again, at the end of the day, do you
[Guest 1]: have the capacity to deliver those projects? Maybe that's where your sort of policy should
[Guest 1]: be oriented towards, that what can we do to actually get some of these outcomes that we
[Guest 1]: need as opposed to focusing on this one lost cause, and making that the priority of a foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, people often, it almost feels natural to be so obsessed with Pakistan, because
[Amit Varma]: they were once, I mean, we were once one country, now they are our neighbor. However, Pranay,
[Amit Varma]: you have this concept of what you call multiple neighborhoods. And in many of the idea being
[Amit Varma]: that we inhabit many neighborhoods simultaneously, and in most of them, Pakistan is not a neighbor,
[Amit Varma]: they're a very distant nation. Kindly explain concept.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so my idea was when we use this word neighbor, we look at it from a geographic
[Guest 2]: lens, right. And in Indian foreign policy, also, the narrative is that India can't do
[Guest 2]: anything until and unless it has great relationships with all its neighbors and the geographic
[Guest 2]: name. I think that is quite unreasonable. No country in the world has good relationships
[Guest 2]: with all its neighbors, and only then it expands to other countries. Like, I mean, US and Mexico
[Guest 2]: also had problems and US and Cuba still have problems, right? So it's unreasonable to say
[Guest 2]: that. So my thinking was that geography is just one axis of looking at neighbors. In
[Guest 2]: fact, India has multiple neighbors. For example, technology wise, India now has neighbors in
[Guest 2]: China, in Europe, and US are India's technological neighbors. Then economic wise, the West Asia
[Guest 2]: is our neighbor for many things, even US again, for the services economy that we are, right.
[Guest 2]: So the idea is that we should come out of this frame that we are, we can't do anything
[Guest 2]: until and unless we have great relationship with every South Asian country, right. So
[Guest 2]: let's look at beyond that we inhabit multiple neighborhoods, and each of these should be
[Guest 2]: looked differently. Sometimes, the government has also articulated this policy in terms
[Guest 2]: of extended neighborhood, but they again look at it geographically that India's close neighborhood
[Guest 2]: is Indian subcontinent, beyond that there is a wider... So Iran would be an extended
[Guest 2]: neighbor. Yeah, level two neighbor. But I'm thinking just geography is just one axis,
[Amit Varma]: and geography is not necessarily the most important thing. I mean, geography is destiny
[Amit Varma]: only if we think it is destiny, in which case, yeah, it's a self fulfilling prophecy. Yeah,
[Guest 2]: so we need to look at all these neighborhoods, and how do we interact with each of them.
[Guest 2]: And we can achieve more in one neighborhood without necessarily conquering or having great
[Guest 2]: relationship with everyone in another neighborhood. That was the idea.
[Amit Varma]: So now my question is, and this will be a very newbie question for guys like you, so
[Amit Varma]: kindly forgive me, but I think many of my listeners will share my curiosity that what
[Amit Varma]: are the mechanics of foreign policy? Like when we talk about foreign policy, most people
[Amit Varma]: are thinking two external affairs ministers are sitting down with their teams over this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, nice, in this nice conference room, and there are flags in the background, and
[Amit Varma]: so on. So but what are the nuts and bolts? Like, what does it mean? You mentioned our
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy core, what is this core? How many you know, what is the training? Are they
[Amit Varma]: lifelong civil servants? Or are they generalists who are brought in from other departments?
[Amit Varma]: And if I mean, I know there's something called the Indian Foreign Services, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So how does it and does that have a culture and a thinking and an ideology of its own?
[Amit Varma]: How does it evolve? And, you know, when what's going on right now, between India and China,
[Amit Varma]: we know there's no top level meeting happening right now. But what is happening? You know,
[Amit Varma]: other governments communicating on a daily basis? What are the sort of movements that
[Guest 2]: happen? Yeah, so I would say there are various economic diplomacy, there is public diplomacy,
[Amit Varma]: so there are various levels of like, who carries this out? Like economic diplomacy? Is it the
[Amit Varma]: finance ministry and the foreign ministry collaborating or? Yeah, so there is that's
[Guest 2]: a good question. See, economic diplomacy is a mix of union governments and a bit of state
[Guest 2]: governments also having a role. For example, remember when Narendra Modi was the CM of
[Guest 2]: Gujarat? Vibrant Gujarat. Yeah. And there was a lot of things with China and trying
[Guest 2]: to establish investments from China. So if you look at economic diplomacy, per se, you
[Guest 2]: have, it's largely the instrument of this is still the IFS. So people who are trained,
[Guest 2]: they are diplomats also do the role of on the economic front. But politically, now even
[Guest 2]: states are getting involved. So what they do is every state, almost every state in India
[Guest 2]: has this investor summit, one gala event every year where they'll call people from across
[Guest 2]: worlds, the companies to come and invest here. Even the CMs go across to many countries now,
[Guest 2]: I remember 2016, the Madhya Pradesh CM was in Washington DC for a day and saying, you
[Guest 2]: know, come and invest in Madhya Pradesh. So that happens. But largely the bureaucratic
[Guest 2]: instrument which carries out economic diplomacy is still the IFS. I have an idea on that,
[Guest 2]: that we should actually, states should be able to have direct relationships on the economic
[Guest 2]: front and they should be able to bypass IFS. Maybe they can fund a chair in the embassy
[Guest 2]: in Washington DC, which is funded by say Karnataka or Maharashtra. And they pursue their own independent
[Guest 2]: economic diplomacy for their own state. It happens in other countries. So for example,
[Guest 2]: Australia, we are in Bangalore and there are, there's Victoria, there are other states of
[Guest 2]: Australia which have a presence here apart from the presence of the Australian government,
[Guest 2]: federal government. So that happens. That is what I would like to see, but currently
[Guest 1]: it is, the instrument is still IFS. I mean, I look at it a little bit. So let's just go
[Guest 1]: from the point of view of who's in China right now. We've got embassies, we've got missions
[Guest 1]: established over there. So you've got the ambassador, you've got counselor officers,
[Guest 1]: you've got people dealing with different portfolios in that embassy. So that's your first point
[Guest 1]: of contact in that country. And that's the same thing with any other country. That's
[Guest 1]: essentially your IFS core, which is doing what it's doing. The IFS core, if I'm, I could
[Guest 1]: be wrong here, but my numbers from what I recall is about 1200 to 1500 people, which
[Guest 1]: is for a country of this size is quite small. In comparison, if I recall China's correctly
[Guest 1]: was about seven and a half, 8,000 or 10,000, around about that. It might've changed in
[Guest 1]: a couple of years. And for the US it's around 15,000. And these are rough sort of numbers
[Guest 1]: that I recall reading a couple of years ago. So you can see that capacity wise, there's
[Guest 1]: this massive difference. There's also the amount of money that you're spending. The
[Guest 1]: Chinese sort of raised double the amount that they were spending. And again, it's very difficult
[Guest 1]: to calculate total spends because how do you estimate it? Is it salaries? Is it what you're
[Guest 1]: spending on events? Is it what you're spending on embassies? Or is it also certain other
[Guest 1]: events that you're doing? Because diplomacy is not just about what the foreign ministry
[Guest 1]: bureaucrats are doing. It's also about necessarily say, when NITI Aayog meets with the National
[Guest 1]: Development Reform Commission over there, and they have a conversation about how do
[Guest 1]: you facilitate investment, cross-border investment on both sides. That's part of your economic
[Guest 1]: diplomacy and it doesn't necessarily have IFS guys involved. They may be working through
[Guest 1]: the IFS in some way or the other, because you need to get people in and you need to
[Guest 1]: actually get some degree of harmony between different institutions. But it's these guys
[Guest 1]: who are actually pursuing an agenda. Likewise, when say health ministries talk or when you
[Guest 1]: sort of establish a dialogue on health on certain things, when you're talking on climate,
[Guest 1]: it might not necessarily be the IFS guys who are taking the lead. It might be different
[Guest 1]: institutions who are doing it, but the IFS will be involved. When you're talking on visas
[Guest 1]: and student exchanges, while your education ministry in India might be involved, also
[Guest 1]: your home ministry might be involved because the home ministry might be worried about certain
[Guest 1]: people coming in from the point of view of espionage or those sorts of things, and they
[Guest 1]: might want to block certain things. So it's multiple institutions that will be involved,
[Guest 1]: driven predominantly by, well in this administration, driven predominantly by the PMO and sort of
[Guest 1]: executed by the Foreign Service, by the MEA. But there are multiple institutions at multiple
[Guest 1]: layers this is happening, of which one sort of other layer, distinct layer is para-diplomacy
[Guest 1]: which Pranay was talking about, which is where states do certain things. That is something
[Guest 1]: that we actually argue for, like Pranay said that, you know, if it might be too radical
[Guest 1]: for an Indian government to sort of say that, well, states can establish their own missions,
[Guest 1]: but at least states should be doing much more because often, say in relationships like India
[Guest 1]: and China, where you end up in a situation that even sort of the smallest steps that
[Guest 1]: you take forward can get pushed back and our industry might end up saying that, well, we
[Guest 1]: don't necessarily want to get Chinese money here, or we don't necessarily want to cut
[Guest 1]: these deals because the next thing you know, there's tension between Delhi and Beijing
[Guest 1]: over the border and our business goes for a toss. Those sorts of things happen because
[Guest 1]: you're dealing through the centre. Once you start dealing independently, there's a lesser
[Guest 1]: chance of that happening, particularly if you're going through your state governments
[Guest 1]: and all of that. You might still have those fears, but you might get certain assurances
[Guest 1]: from a state government saying, look, behind you, you can do this. So I think somewhere
[Guest 1]: the states need to take a greater role in that and that sort of para-diplomacy needs
[Guest 1]: to happen. People-to-people engagement, again, it's states that need to play a role. The
[Guest 1]: central government can say, yes, we're going to facilitate visas, but it's actually the
[Guest 1]: state government that probably might decide that, you know what, this is a destination
[Guest 1]: which might be really interesting for Chinese visitors because there's a history for China
[Guest 1]: or for American visitors because there's a history here and let's tailor the experience
[Guest 1]: to attract this kind of visitor. And you do that. I mean, the West does that, right? When
[Guest 1]: you go to London today and you go for a holiday, stores like Harrods have special Chinese signage
[Guest 1]: and all of that. And you're doing that because you see that there's a revenue stream and
[Guest 1]: there's a store doing it, but a city can also do it. A city can put up, a city can create
[Guest 1]: an app which makes, which ensures that if a tourist from, say, a heavy spending country,
[Guest 1]: let's assume Japan, is coming to India, they can access information in Japanese if they
[Guest 1]: can't access it in English. So those are the things, executions the states have to do,
[Guest 1]: and that's where they can become part of this broader thing. But yeah, so that's how I would
[Guest 1]: classify the sort of machinations of foreign policy as a whole. At any given point of time,
[Guest 1]: there are multiple things happening. The armed forces play a role in it. There are delegations
[Guest 1]: coming back and forth, which have foreign policy implications. And this is a continuous
[Guest 1]: process. So this sort of engagement is continuous and it should be continuous. Because if you
[Guest 1]: keep snapping this over a period of time, you don't end up building the institutional
[Guest 1]: memory of how do you deal with crisis when they occur.
[Guest 2]: And we are talking about diplomacy, but foreign policy will include other things as well.
[Guest 2]: Like there will be intelligence, which happens, then there will be even defense policy, right?
[Guest 2]: So there will be military attaches, for example, who will be stationed at important missions
[Guest 2]: abroad. They look at the military side of things. So if we talk about foreign policy,
[Guest 2]: it includes these elements as well. But we were narrowly talking about just the diplomatic
[Amit Varma]: instrument.
[Amit Varma]: So now in domestic politics, just as it seems that the state often takes credit for something
[Amit Varma]: that society has achieved, right? Which is very typical in India and which often society
[Amit Varma]: has achieved in spite of the state. It strikes me that in foreign policy, nations are often
[Amit Varma]: negotiating over things which are actually people to people things. For example, a one
[Amit Varma]: big political issue often is a trade deficit. And people behave as if one country is trading
[Amit Varma]: directly with another country. But the truth is people from both countries are trading
[Amit Varma]: with each other to mutual benefit. And you'd imagine therefore that the job of the country,
[Amit Varma]: the job of the state is to enable those transactions.
[Amit Varma]: So now, let's take a scenario where I'm doing this to come to a question about conflicting
[Amit Varma]: interests within arms of the state. That where, for example, I am from the foreign office
[Amit Varma]: and I feel that it's great if China invests more, and if more of their goods come. But
[Amit Varma]: let's say Manoj is from the Home Department, and he has political pressure because lobbies
[Amit Varma]: of local manufacturers are saying no put heavy tariffs, because otherwise, it is hurting
[Amit Varma]: us. And of course, economically sound thing to do is to not have any tariffs at all. But
[Amit Varma]: there are these political pressures. So are there these kind of internal, like from within
[Amit Varma]: the government, pulls and pressures that the foreign office has to deal with?
[Guest 2]: Obviously that exists. And an example of that is the Huawei issue, which is currently going
[Guest 2]: on. So should Huawei be involved in India's 5G critical infrastructure? Now, there are
[Guest 2]: various views on it. One clear view is the economic view that India might be losing out
[Guest 2]: on a lot of things because Huawei is clearly the front runner. It overestimates its ability
[Guest 2]: because Samsung and all are also catching up. But nevertheless, there will be some economic
[Guest 2]: loss to it. On the other hand, there is the security first approach, which says that,
[Guest 2]: you know, you shouldn't involve China because they might snoop into your infrastructure.
[Guest 2]: Then the third one is a strategic view, right? That what it does it augur well for India
[Guest 2]: to give away, hand over its critical infrastructure to an adversarial state, which is more powerful
[Guest 2]: than us than currently, right? So these are all conflicting views. So foreign policy always
[Guest 2]: has to grapple with this. On this particular issue, for example, again, using the multiple
[Guest 2]: tents and not one camp approach, the way we have articulated it is that for phones, etc,
[Guest 2]: which give a tremendous amount of consumer surplus to an individual Indian, we should
[Guest 2]: allow Huawei or any Chinese phone. But when it comes to the critical network infrastructure,
[Guest 2]: we should avoid Chinese investment there. What do you say?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, no, that's the argument that we've made. And I agree with that argument. I think the
[Guest 1]: other sort of example, while you were sort of framing the question, the thought kept
[Guest 1]: into my mind, the thought that kept coming to me was, you were talking about RCEP and
[Guest 1]: India pulling out of RCEP. It was exactly that, right? It was the fact that you were
[Guest 1]: negotiating for so many years, and you were positive despite sort of domestic push and
[Guest 1]: pull from multiple lobbies within India. And even sort of this government sort of Swadeshi
[Guest 1]: branch, which wanted us to pull out of this deal, yet we were negotiating the fact that
[Guest 1]: the Prime Minister went there, obviously, he didn't go there with the idea that I'm
[Guest 1]: going to go there and say thanks, but no thanks. He went there with the idea of signing up.
[Guest 1]: Yet there were pressures that forced him to pull out, which predominantly were domestic
[Guest 1]: sort of economic pressures, which told him that his lobbies would probably not be working
[Guest 1]: in his favor. If he ends up signing this deal, it'll hurt him politically.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's really ironic and really sad that the one time the Prime Minister listened to
[Amit Varma]: pressure from the opposition, it was to do the wrong thing. I mean, our pulling out of
[Amit Varma]: RCEP, frankly, was just so stupid and counterproductive, according to me.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think he listened to the opposition. I think they also believe in this.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I think he...
[Amit Varma]: The Swadeshi wing and all of that.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think he listened to that sort of part, because otherwise, it made no sense
[Guest 1]: to go there. The fact that you went there, you thought that you had a deal and you would
[Guest 1]: want to actually end up doing a deal. But yeah, that's exactly an example of how these
[Amit Varma]: things play out and...
[Guest 1]: One good thing the man was about to do.
[Guest 1]: That could have been one of those transformative things in foreign policy.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, actually, Amit, I don't think foreign policy is any different. It's actually just
[Guest 2]: between concentrated interest versus dispersed interest, right? The benefits are they concentrated
[Guest 2]: or they are dispersed. So, for example, if there is a foreign policy which allows investments
[Guest 2]: from all countries, it will benefit a large number of people in a dispersed manner, but
[Guest 2]: it will affect a few Indian incumbent players in a concentrated manner.
[Amit Varma]: So, concentrated costs, and therefore, they will lobby in all of that.
[Guest 2]: Which exists in other areas also. So, it's quite similar to that. And on trade deficit,
[Guest 2]: for example, we've always argued, right? It is about trade deficit by itself is not a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing at all.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. I mean, I have a trade deficit with my domestic help, for example. I pay her every
[Guest 2]: month, I buy her services, she doesn't buy anything from me. And it's a positive sum
[Guest 2]: game.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So, and it indicates comparative advantage. So, if China's investment into India, we have
[Guest 2]: manufactured products come from China to India, it indicates that they are good at it. But
[Guest 2]: we can have some other trade, we can use that investment to grow our own companies. And
[Guest 2]: then our companies, we can again invest back in China, right? So, it is about...
[Amit Varma]: And a part of me, the libertarian part of me is also rebelling to the way you're saying
[Amit Varma]: our and we and because these are all dispersed individuals and dispersed companies who are
[Amit Varma]: all trading to sort of mutual benefit. We've spoken a lot about how sort of India looks
[Amit Varma]: at the world. Let's talk about how the world looks at India. For example, let's start with
[Amit Varma]: the US. I mean, let's go major power by major power. Let's start at the US that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: initially through the Cold War, we must have been an extremely pesky presence for them,
[Amit Varma]: though, you know, they've blown hot and cold. I had a fascinating episode with Srinath Raghavan
[Amit Varma]: on US foreign policy in South Asia over the decades. But how has that changed in recent
[Amit Varma]: years? And secondly, can it change in recent years? Like, can we talk of something called
[Amit Varma]: a coherent foreign policy where so much of what they do is to the whims and fancies and
[Guest 2]: Twitter moods of their president at 3am? Yeah, again, so for example, we can't look at us
[Guest 2]: as a rational actor only because then there are these big variances which are happening
[Guest 2]: now. But if I had to make that simplification, I think broadly, US, as I said earlier, the
[Guest 2]: transition has been one they see India at a different level than a regional player and
[Guest 2]: a different from Pakistan. And secondly, they see India as a potential balancing power against
[Guest 2]: China. That's why they are so interested in doing lots of things, a quad and others where
[Guest 2]: India becomes an important role. So largely, the trend has been positive. US requires India
[Guest 2]: as well for its own interests. So that's where our interests overlap. Yeah, and also possible
[Guest 1]: market for many more things, not just goods, but also things like education. I mean, high
[Guest 1]: time when we open up our education sector to foreign institutes and universities, and the
[Guest 1]: attraction of Western institutes is obviously going to be primary. So there's lots of places
[Guest 1]: where lots of untapped potential that you can sort of nurture and eventually sort of
[Guest 1]: get to hopefully, and to me as the rest of it, I agree with Pranay that yeah, that's
[Guest 2]: how the US looks at us. So you have strength in numbers, right? Anything that comes into
[Guest 2]: India or China, you always have a huge market. So a lot of countries, companies which are
[Guest 2]: in different nation states are looking at it. So they are trying to push the foreign
[Guest 2]: policy of their nation state in favor of the other nation states, right? And also, there's
[Amit Varma]: been a lot happening in recent years. So there are all these pulls and pressures in the relationship
[Amit Varma]: with the Middle East, obviously, with North Korea, and the recent sort of tensions with
[Amit Varma]: Iran, and all of that. Does India just kind of take a step back and say, keys, none of
[Amit Varma]: our business, let them play out? Or are there opportunities for us? And are there threats
[Amit Varma]: for us in all of this potential turmoil that may happen?
[Guest 2]: There are definitely opportunities and threats there. And we can't afford to have a completely
[Guest 2]: isolationist position, because now the global economy is also intertwined. Just anything
[Amit Varma]: which happens on Iran is going to affect our...
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, some of them are in our neighborhood, depending on how we define
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: Exactly. So that is an important factor. So, but what realistically India can do depends
[Guest 2]: on India's own capabilities, right? And that needs to come from gaining more strength economically
[Guest 2]: and militarily, for which we need to grow. So we might want to do great things, but to
[Guest 2]: achieve them in reality, we need to build strength. So if we have to look at it from
[Guest 2]: the same strength, okay, something US does with Iran, now we will do a marginal cost
[Guest 2]: marginal benefit approach, right? Should we intervene in that in some way or not? Now,
[Guest 2]: the marginal benefit of intervening currently for the marginal cost will be high because
[Guest 2]: we, US is closely tied with the Indian economy in Iran, not so much apart from oil. So realistically,
[Guest 2]: if we can, if we want to change that marginal benefit cost calculation, we have to build
[Guest 1]: our own strength.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, that is going to be fundamental to everything. Like, I mean, the current foreign ministers
[Guest 1]: use this phrase, right? That India will be a leading power, we will no longer abstain
[Guest 1]: from things and we will actually take decisions. That's wonderful. But would you have the capacity
[Guest 1]: to sustain the backlash from some of these decisions? Would you have the capacity to
[Guest 1]: back those decisions up as needed? Those are the kind of things I mean, so far, it's in
[Guest 1]: the region like the Middle East, the fact that India has done somewhat similar to what
[Guest 1]: the Chinese have done is, we want to have a good relationship with everybody. We don't
[Guest 1]: necessarily want to rock the boat with anybody because fundamentally, our energy resources
[Guest 1]: come from here. And we don't have the capacity like the US to, you know, twist and turn your
[Guest 1]: arms to get you to agree to our demands. So we want to have a good relationship with everybody.
[Guest 1]: And while we sort of stick to certain principle positions, so while through the time through
[Guest 1]: the 90s, we were sort of pro the Palestinian cause, we also developed a very deep relationship
[Guest 1]: with Israel. And those are the kind of things that have benefited us in the long run. Pivoting
[Guest 1]: away from some of these things might create new complications, at least till you don't
[Guest 1]: have the capacity to pivot away. And you know, deal with the consequences that will come
[Guest 1]: with it. One of the examples in the Middle East, if I was to continue that example, our
[Guest 1]: greatest dependency is energy. Variations in prices hit our economy badly. What are
[Guest 1]: the sort of alternative methods that we're doing? One of the ideas that we've discussed
[Guest 1]: in the office is a strategic reserve and where our strategic reserve are. We've been studying
[Guest 1]: that and what we realized is based on studying is that actually, we've done reasonably well
[Guest 1]: on that. So now when you've done that, you've created for yourself the room to be able to
[Guest 1]: do some of these other things that you might want to. Shift your positions, pivot and deal
[Guest 1]: with the pressure that might come with somebody saying, well, okay, fine, these are the prices
[Guest 1]: of oil or artificially if I'm going to reduce output and that's going to affect you. So
[Guest 1]: if we do some of these things, then yes, you can make those decisions, which may seem difficult.
[Guest 1]: But till you're not doing that, you're not going to be making those decisions. And that's
[Guest 1]: where the capacity argument comes in.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move now to China, on which of course you and I did an episode a few months ago,
[Amit Varma]: Manoj. With China, I have a dual question, which is one, of course, how does it look
[Amit Varma]: at India and how that has changed? But two, also China was famously very insular for a
[Amit Varma]: long time where they looked within, you know, they were the middle kingdom and they were
[Amit Varma]: quite happy to kind of ignore everything outside their peripheries. And has that been changing?
[Amit Varma]: Are they more aggressive? Are they more into projecting power? And how has their dynamic
[Amit Varma]: with the US changed? Partly because of situations outside their control, of course, but how
[Amit Varma]: are things evolving? And how does all of that affect India? Which is like 20 questions.
[Guest 1]: I'm so sorry.
[Guest 1]: So, no, just a quick sweep. The Chinese were insular for a very small period of time, which
[Guest 1]: was about 10-12 years when the cultural revolution happened. And they had after the internal
[Guest 1]: turmoil till 78, which is when they entered reform and opening up.
[Guest 1]: But even historically, all those kingdoms and the powers.
[Guest 1]: So, not necessarily. I mean, there was a point of time where the Ming dynasty was outward
[Guest 1]: looking. It was actually venturing into many places. I mean, if you look at, this is a
[Guest 1]: good exercise to do. So anybody sitting at home, just go and download all the maps of
[Guest 1]: Chinese dynasties and then superimpose them over each other, creating a time lapse. And
[Guest 1]: you will actually see that the ancient state has expanded quite significantly with each
[Amit Varma]: dynasty.
[Amit Varma]: I would like to see some listener do this, please. A great image on Twitter.
[Guest 1]: So it will be this, you'll see that the state has expanded quite significantly over a period
[Guest 1]: of time. And there have been, and if you then look at sort of just beyond what is the current
[Guest 1]: Chinese state territory, you'll see that they also ventured in many places under with Zheng
[Guest 1]: He.
[Guest 1]: Then there came a point where they looked inward. And this looking inward had to do
[Guest 1]: partly with their own sense of we are self-contained, but also the sense of, you know, subsequently
[Guest 1]: as sort of the industrial revolution hits, the fact that we are sort of losing out and
[Guest 1]: therefore we are looking inward even more.
[Guest 1]: This happened during the Qing dynasty.
[Guest 1]: Now fast forward to Mao Zedong, what Mao Zedong did was initially he was an outward looking
[Guest 1]: fellow. He didn't have the capacity, just like India didn't have the capacity to actually
[Guest 1]: influence events, but he realized that he could do it asymmetrically. So while he invested
[Guest 1]: in building the bomb and doing all of those things, he also trained revolutionaries from
[Guest 1]: around the world.
[Guest 1]: So in India, there were revolutionaries that were sort of trained over there in Africa,
[Guest 1]: in East Asia, in the Middle East, there were lots of revolutionaries that were trained.
[Unknown]: And the idea was to export this model. So you were outward looking in that sense. You
[Guest 1]: might not necessarily be looking at expanding territory of the Chinese state, but at least
[Guest 1]: the influence through revolution was a case.
[Guest 1]: Then came the cultural revolution, which became, where it became insular, because you were
[Guest 1]: just sowing chaos within for the sake of some churn of revolution that he thought he would
[Guest 1]: achieve.
[Guest 1]: And then subsequently in 78, you start seeing this shift of policy where you open up to
[Guest 1]: the broader world, attract foreign investment, work with international organizations, work
[Guest 1]: with foreign experts to sort of reform your economy. Deng Xiaoping travels to the US,
[Guest 1]: wears that cowboy hat and everything becomes hunky dory. But the objective there was, we
[Guest 1]: still don't have the capacity to maybe influence things on a certain scale.
[Guest 1]: So we define what are our core interests, what we can't necessarily give, but within
[Guest 1]: that we have a lot of pragmatism of room to cooperate. And that's when Deng Xiaoping comes
[Guest 1]: up with these frameworks, right? Oh, we can talk about these disputes later, let's first
[Guest 1]: get rich. And he tells that to other countries also, let's first get rich, we can do all
[Guest 1]: this stuff later.
[Guest 1]: Fast forward to today, the Chinese come to a point after 2008, when the financial crisis
[Guest 1]: hits where they feel that we've gotten fairly rich. And from 2008 onwards, still growth
[Guest 1]: in China is quite significant. And by the time Xi Jinping is coming to power, they've
[Guest 1]: already sort of remoulding their policy towards saying that, I think we've gotten to a point
[Guest 1]: where we can actually sort of start pushing forward. And we probably also need to push
[Guest 1]: on certain things, because internally, our economic growth will start to slow down significantly
[Guest 1]: and until we start to push outward.
[Guest 1]: So they want to sort of aggressively push investments outside because you've got so
[Guest 1]: much foreign reserve, which is not yielding enough return in treasury bonds, and so on
[Guest 1]: and so forth, that you want to sort of create more revenue also. So there are multiple factors
[Guest 1]: which lead to this push outside. And that's where they are today, where they feel that
[Guest 1]: formally the sort of ideology shifts from hiding and biding your time to let's actively
[Guest 1]: change things to be able to get our objectives. And that's what they're doing right now. It's
[Guest 1]: again, in some ways, just the fact that I think, I think Pranay will talk about this
[Guest 1]: just as Edward Luttwak in his book had this wonderful analogy of China being this giant
[Guest 1]: elephant in an elevator. And just by the fact that it's an elephant in an elevator, it's
[Guest 1]: squeezing other people. And it's growing larger and the larger it's growing, the more it's
[Guest 1]: squeezing people. So even if it doesn't have aggressive intent, it's creating problems
[Guest 1]: for others. And that's what's sort of happening with the Chinese. In terms of how they look
[Guest 1]: at India, if you read what they say, I mean, don't go by the great informal symmetry that
[Guest 1]: we're doing and the wonderful pictures, just read their classification of powers. They
[Guest 1]: have a classification of major powers in which they see the Russia, the US and the European
[Guest 1]: Union. And then they have a classification of peripheral powers. India falls within peripheral
[Guest 1]: power. It's a little bit notch above the sort of Vietnam, Philippines, of course, but it's
[Guest 1]: still a peripheral power, which it sees within the context of this sort of Indian Ocean,
[Guest 1]: South Asian region. They don't necessarily see them as a, see India as a major power.
[Guest 1]: And that's why the sense is that this can be a pesky irritant, like you defined, described
[Guest 1]: India in the 50s for the US. This can be an irritant in sort of our pathway. It can also
[Guest 1]: be a troublemaker because it has the capacity to deliver a certain kind of pain, particularly
[Guest 1]: if you enter into conflict. Yet, by and large, status quo won't necessarily be looking to
[Guest 1]: move and alter status quo. Inefficient, unable to necessarily deliver large scale projects,
[Guest 1]: which creates a credibility crisis in other countries and therefore creates opportunities
[Guest 1]: for us. So, it is a threat in some ways, particularly as China sort of expands into the Indian Ocean
[Guest 1]: region, but largely a threat that they feel they can contain. And that's what we've seen
[Guest 1]: them try to do. At any point of time with China's relationship with the US tends to
[Guest 1]: become difficult. You've seen them reach out to the neighbours and try to sort of smoothen
[Guest 1]: tensions along the periphery. And that's what's happened in the last couple of years. As you,
[Guest 1]: as and when and if, although it's highly unlikely they enter into some sort of a modus vivendi
[Guest 1]: with the US, with this current tension with the US, you'll probably start seeing greater
[Guest 1]: pressure. You'll probably start seeing greater pressure on India, on Japan and these countries.
[Guest 1]: What kind of pressure? So, you'll probably start seeing greater pushback on Indian criticism.
[Guest 1]: You'd probably start seeing greater money being invested in South Asia. You'd probably
[Guest 1]: start seeing greater arguments against this idea that, you know, we want India to be part
[Guest 1]: of this broader BRI or whatever. Well, if you don't want to be part of it, don't be
[Guest 1]: part of it. We don't necessarily need to work with you. The market will remain an allure.
[Guest 1]: So, if you can have an India which is favourable to you, great. If you can have an India which
[Guest 1]: is non-aligned in this conflict with the US, acceptable. But if you can actually enter
[Guest 1]: into some sort of a deal with the US or some sort of a G2 arrangement, then India becomes
[Guest 1]: far less significant in some ways. Because then you are looking at, and then actually
[Guest 1]: for you might become much more significant to India. Because India might say, well, okay,
[Guest 1]: now we need to work with them more. So, you will see the Chinese pushing their weight
[Guest 1]: around a little bit more than what they do normally. So, those are the kind of things
[Guest 2]: that I think we can see going forward. Yeah. Again, if you see, right, because US sees
[Guest 2]: China as a challenger, and now China is also aspiring to be the US. When you talk about
[Guest 2]: India-China relationship, again, US becomes an important determinant. So, again, if I
[Guest 2]: have to draw really broadly a few schools of thought from China over the last few years,
[Guest 2]: they would be one school of thought sees India as doing US's bidding on a lot of things.
[Guest 2]: That is one extremist school of thought. The other school of thought, which was there probably
[Guest 2]: 10 years ago, it had some narrative dominance, was India as a competitor to some of the things
[Guest 2]: China is doing. Now, not so much, but that was one. The other, the third narrative is
[Guest 2]: India is insignificant. That also was a narrative, which is no longer the dominant one at any
[Guest 2]: point of time, but it exists. And the fourth one is India as a competitor, right? Competition
[Guest 2]: in some areas and probably areas of cooperation in others. So, I think these are like broad
[Guest 2]: four schools of thought. The two that are dominant now, I would say is one, sometimes
[Guest 2]: they see India as doing US's bidding. And the other one is, no, but there are areas
[Guest 2]: of cooperation that we can explore. What do you think? Yeah, no, I think the primary concern
[Guest 1]: from them from an Indian perspective is that they see India as a potential spoiler in terms
[Guest 1]: of its alignment with the US. And therefore, I said, an India which is aligned to the US
[Guest 1]: is problematic. An India which is favorable to China, great. An India which is non-aligned
[Guest 1]: in this contest with the US is acceptable. But an India which sort of tilts towards the
[Guest 1]: US in more ways than one is problematic. I mean, every time you read the Chinese talking
[Guest 1]: about anything that India does, it's through this prism of the US. To me, that tells you
[Guest 1]: two things. One, that their competition with the US is what's defining this. And the other,
[Guest 1]: that this idea of India as a cooperative partner in certain areas is also limited to the prism
[Guest 1]: of not necessarily strategic domains. Because you'll see the fact that you're worried about
[Guest 1]: certain this party aligning with your primary adversary, you know that you're not going
[Guest 1]: to be cooperating with them on strategic domains. But what you also know is that this party
[Guest 1]: is not necessarily as significant in the larger scheme of things if I can reach a deal with
[Guest 1]: the Americans. Then the potential of an India to play a spoiler in my eyes is far smaller.
[Guest 1]: Because it doesn't necessarily have the kind of backing that it has. Unless it's obviously
[Guest 1]: growing significantly at those 8, 9, 10% over the next 10 years while this competition with
[Guest 1]: the US continues to play out. And then you're at a point where India is significantly stronger.
[Guest 1]: So then even if you've sort of got some sort of a deal with the US, this is a significant
[Guest 1]: problem irrespective of that. At the moment, I don't think that's the case.
[Amit Varma]: And a final question about China before we move on, which is that the long standing disputes
[Amit Varma]: they have with us into including the border disputes, are they just strategic levers which
[Amit Varma]: you use as and when you want to manipulate your way to some kind of a, you know, change
[Amit Varma]: the equilibrium? Or can any of them actually escalate and explode into conflict?
[Guest 1]: Look, I think there is a probability is very, very low. But there is a possibility that
[Guest 1]: you can end up having conflict. To me, if you look at China's history, when it comes
[Guest 1]: to dealing with territorial disputes, it had about 14, 11, 12, 11 to 14 grand border disputes
[Guest 1]: and it settled most of them. The only ones that are remaining are with Bhutan and India.
[Guest 1]: And the one with Bhutan is also remaining because India is a party to all of it. I mean,
[Guest 1]: given the asymmetry between Bhutan and China, the Chinese would have settled it one way
[Guest 1]: or the other. I think the border dispute with India persists for a number of reasons. It's
[Guest 1]: partly sort of strategically, because you wanted to push that aside and say, let's work
[Guest 1]: together on certain things, which is what Rajiv Gandhi and Deng Xiaoping agreed to.
[Guest 1]: And you thought, okay, let's just go about confidence building and we'll do this. From
[Guest 1]: a Chinese point of view, was there any value in settling this dispute and giving away what
[Guest 1]: became important territory, particularly Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh, which was sort of became
[Guest 1]: in some way linked to identity of their control over Tibet and those sorts of things. The
[Guest 1]: other bit was the fact that till the Dalai Lama saw that as a problem, the Dalai Lama's
[Guest 1]: influence in Tibet as a problem, you could not necessarily resolve it because you saw
[Guest 1]: that as a persistent problem. I think today it's an opportunity for them to use it strategically.
[Guest 1]: So there is no incentive for the Chinese to resolve this dispute. India is not necessarily
[Guest 1]: going to be, like I said, they don't necessarily see India as a power which is going to necessarily
[Guest 1]: move to alter the status quo. They see India as a status quo power. So they want to come
[Guest 1]: to a point where the Indians would either agree to what your formulation is, if not,
[Guest 1]: and if you even want to say current status quo becomes international boundary. For that,
[Guest 1]: you need to be feeling comfortable enough in the political position of the leader, which
[Guest 1]: I guess they're right now, but also the fact that you need to feel comfortable about your
[Guest 1]: control over Tibet and the idea that you control Tibet. Increasingly, that's become the bigger
[Guest 1]: issue is how do you see, how do you see Arunachal Pradesh? The fact that Chinese in the last
[Guest 1]: couple of years have internally issued revised maps, demarcating places in Arunachal Pradesh
[Guest 1]: with Chinese names and drawing them in Chinese. It tells you that they're not serious about
[Guest 1]: settling this with India at status quo levels. And they want to sort of pressurize India.
[Guest 1]: If India agrees to give on some of those things in some sort of a package deal saying, okay,
[Guest 1]: you can take this and we'll take that. Very difficult for an Indian government to give
[Guest 1]: up Arunachal Pradesh. But if India was to agree to something like that, the Chinese
[Guest 1]: would be game for it. I don't think that they'll see no value in settling this. But at the
[Guest 1]: moment, the fact that they want to keep it alive and they don't want to necessarily even
[Guest 1]: share their formal claims with you, tells you that they want to use it as a strategic,
[Guest 1]: they want to use it as a lever. Anytime you need it, you can use it.
[Guest 2]: And I would also say China has settled its territorial disputes with many countries,
[Guest 2]: but created new territorial disputes as well on the maritime domain.
[Guest 1]: So the interesting thing about the South China Sea is that it's about, so one of the reasons
[Guest 1]: of how these disputes have come about, right? So in 49, once the PRC is formed, the Communist
[Guest 1]: Party does not necessarily have a sense of bureaucracy and state apparatus. I mean, it's
[Guest 1]: not like when India got independence, there was a trained bureaucracy. These were ragtag
[Guest 1]: fighters who were running around the country, you know, predominantly propelled by villagers
[Guest 1]: and farmers, peasants and workers. For them to suddenly figure out, the idea that you
[Guest 1]: imagine where your boundaries lie, and this is where my territory ends, and this is sovereignty
[Guest 1]: therefore, is a difficult concept to grasp. So what you take is what you get from the
[Guest 1]: past. And the idea of the South China Sea, this is an interesting argument of how your
[Guest 1]: claims, how the claims develop, how this nine-dash line developed. In 1911-12, there was a line
[Guest 1]: drawn by some researcher. In the 30s, another researcher had taken it up and two of his
[Guest 1]: students took up from their teacher's course material. That got translated to a forum in
[Guest 1]: Beijing in the 40s. That when the Communist Party came to power, they saw this as, oh,
[Guest 1]: okay, this makes sense, this is probably our boundaries. And that becomes part of your
[Guest 1]: sort of imagination going forward that this is, this dashed line is part of Chinese territory.
[Guest 1]: Now, if you go back further, further, further, you'll find many more examples of when it
[Guest 1]: was and when it wasn't. And the Chinese have subsequently done that. When the Communist
[Guest 1]: Party came to power, they didn't have a sense of this. You got this piece of paper and you
[Guest 1]: thought this makes sense. But the origins of that line, the significance of it to your
[Guest 1]: national identity and your territorial integrity and your sovereignty is manufactured over
[Guest 1]: a number of years. And it's manufactured because, in part, that's how you start imagining what
[Guest 1]: you were. So part of that is this creation of new ideas, but part of that is also just
[Guest 1]: you get this institutional memory from somewhere and you start to incorporate it because that's
[Guest 1]: how you want to imagine your greatness going forward. And that's what happens in most of
[Guest 2]: these disputes.
[Guest 2]: I would like to say that China doing border incidents like the case of Doklam is actually
[Guest 2]: a strategic mistake on their part, because that is going to develop this whole narrative
[Guest 2]: in India. See, nationalism will always come up on these issues, right? And then it will
[Guest 2]: develop a narrative in India that, you know, China is only an adversary and nothing else.
[Guest 2]: So that from a, if you take a longer arc for China, it is not good that you are going to
[Guest 2]: just antagonize a whole set of Indians for some small border dispute, right? It's not
[Guest 2]: as if India, they can run over India. It's not possible. We are nuclear powers. It's
[Guest 2]: not as if they are going to take over Arunachal Pradesh and India is not going to do anything.
[Guest 2]: So the gains for them from any of these border disputes are very little, but they have a
[Guest 2]: lot more to lose.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to how Pakistan looks at India. And I know you're looking at me with
[Amit Varma]: disapproval because I've moved closer geographically from the US to China to Pakistan. So this
[Amit Varma]: happens to be the default neighborhood that I have chosen. So how does Pakistan look at
[Amit Varma]: India and does Pakistan have a foreign policy towards India or a military jihadi policy?
[Guest 2]: Both because both entities exist, but it is predominantly, see in Pakistan, it is very
[Guest 2]: clear that defense, anything related to India is the domain of the military jihadi complex.
[Guest 2]: So the putative state does not have that much to say. So they do have a policy and their
[Guest 2]: policy is to ensure that, you know, India doesn't. It's just like how in India now you
[Guest 2]: see everything being talked about with a reference to Pakistan. In Pakistan, it's been there
[Guest 2]: for many, many years, right? Like everything you see it from an Indian lens. So that sort
[Guest 2]: of continues. What has hurt them is that their economy has also faltered because of this,
[Guest 2]: because of the terrorists. Terrorism is an instrument of their foreign policy. It has
[Guest 2]: bitten them back. And because of that, their own strength in to hurt India has reduced.
[Guest 2]: And that's why there is a bit of rethinking in certain quarters there as well. A lot of
[Guest 2]: military jihadi rethink is happening. Now just think of it, right? They were on the
[Guest 2]: gravy train from the US. They used to get this coalition support funds and all that.
[Guest 2]: Now US policy changed because this terrorism had an impact on US as well. And the narrative
[Guest 2]: in the US changed that, you know, Pakistan is not a good partner.
[Amit Varma]: And is that narrative changing got something to do with India's foreign policy? Is that
[Amit Varma]: a foreign policy success for us? Did we manipulate that in some way or did it change on its own?
[Guest 2]: That is, I think, Pakistan's own doing. India did have a role. I think just the fact that
[Guest 2]: India was growing from 2004 to 2009, that itself was India's biggest contribution to
[Guest 2]: change this narrative. But apart from that, Pakistan did many things on its own. And it
[Guest 2]: helped in developing a narrative in the US that, you know, Pakistan is not a partner
[Guest 2]: which has the same interests as that of the US. So now that has happened, they are also
[Guest 2]: feeling the pinch, right? No investments coming in, everyone in the world thinking of Pakistan
[Guest 2]: as the state which has sponsored terrorism. So because of that, there is a lot of terrorism
[Guest 2]: incidents happening within Pakistan itself, right? So that's why there is on the military
[Guest 2]: jihadi complex also, there is a lot of churn happening internally, you know, and that is
[Guest 2]: what is going on currently.
[Amit Varma]: And has the relationship with China changed the incentives for them? Because with China
[Amit Varma]: investing so much in Pakistan, they would obviously want Pakistan to be stable and not
[Amit Varma]: muck around and especially not get into a war with India. Does that then affect us positively
[Amit Varma]: because it changes Pakistan's behaviour towards us?
[Guest 1]: So my sense is that the jury is out on that. In theory, yes. In theory, yes, the fact that
[Guest 1]: the Chinese are engaged in the region much more, and they are Pakistan's primary benefactor,
[Guest 1]: they would, you would assume that they would want greater stability, but I'm not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: sure that that's actually played out.
[Guest 1]: Because they might not be rational actors as the model assumes.
[Guest 1]: They might not be rational actors and also the sense that you know, you until instability
[Guest 1]: in India caused by Pakistan based actors also helps China, it keeps India sort of, you know,
[Guest 1]: left lost out a little bit. And I think that is one of the things that actually plays out.
[Guest 1]: The other thing is that you want to necessarily have instability at till a certain threshold,
[Guest 1]: you don't want it to cross a certain threshold. And I think that's where what we are seeing
[Guest 1]: is being played out. So when you see that things can escalate, which is what happened
[Guest 1]: in February last year, you will see the Chinese also actively getting involved in saying guys,
[Guest 1]: calm down, calm down. And all right, you know, the Indian foreign minister is in Beijing,
[Guest 1]: and we're talking about these things. And we're going to say, yes, yes, we are statement
[Guest 1]: is going to say, let's eradicate the root causes of terrorism. And then two weeks later,
[Guest 1]: once the Pakistani foreign minister comes in, he says, yes, yes, what we mean by root
[Guest 1]: causes of terrorism is development. So you might end up doing some of those things because
[Guest 1]: and that tells you that the sense is that let's keep certain threshold of instability
[Guest 1]: is fine. The challenge for the Chinese going forward, and that would be well, how do you
[Guest 1]: stop to breed that instability? You need actors which are funded, supported by state instruments,
[Guest 1]: the military jihadi complex, and you need the jihadis also, which are non state actors
[Guest 1]: effectively, or definitionally wise, they are non state actors, how are you going to
[Guest 1]: contain them from then turning on to the Chinese who are working in Pakistan? I mean, let's
[Guest 1]: remember those many years ago when that Lal Masjid siege happened in Lahore, it was the
[Guest 1]: Chinese who were taken hostages. And the frustration of those people who took the Chinese hostages
[Guest 1]: was essentially that the justification was that they are perverting our culture by their
[Guest 1]: massage parlours. So as you have more Chinese engaged in Pakistan, how do you then keep
[Guest 1]: this sort of thing separated, that there won't be a backlash against you. And there are already
[Guest 1]: certain cases where there is a backlash against them. Pakistan is a conservative society.
[Guest 1]: And also the more, and Nitin says this always, you know, the closer they embrace the tighter
[Guest 1]: their embrace, the, you know, greater the tensions that they'll end up feeling. So it's
[Guest 1]: going to be a difficult balancing act for the Chinese to do this. But at the moment,
[Guest 1]: I'm not necessarily sure that the fact that the Chinese are engaged means greater stability.
[Amit Varma]: Theoretically, yes, but I don't think that's how it's playing out. And even theoretically,
[Amit Varma]: like you said, it's probably in their interest to keep a certain threshold of conflict going
[Amit Varma]: because that prevents the Indian army from changing focus to China completely. You know,
[Guest 2]: as you guys were mentioning earlier. And let's look at what kind of a benefactor China is
[Guest 2]: towards military jihadi complex, because that is what determines their relationship with
[Guest 2]: India to us. Unlike the US, US was all giving them just cash to run Afghanistan policy.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a friend of mine, when I was in Pakistan in 2006, had said that in Pakistan, they call
[Guest 2]: Al-Qaeda Al-Faida, because the USA just flowed in. Yeah. But China is not a similar actor.
[Guest 2]: For example, a lot of money that they're putting in is also conditional. It is loans, not grants.
[Guest 2]: So there they are more involved and they are in the neighborhood. Remember, they are not
[Guest 2]: far away like the US is. You are talking of geographical neighborhoods. Yeah, I hope China
[Guest 2]: sees it. So given that they are in the neighborhood, their interests are slightly different from
[Guest 2]: that of the US. And remember, still, US GDP per capita is $60,000. China is $10,000. So
[Guest 2]: it's not as if they can give the same amount of money to Pakistan. So military jihadi complex
[Guest 2]: is going to feel the pinch of money. One, because they don't have the same guy as the
[Guest 2]: US on their side. And second, China is also going to give loans and not grants. So that
[Guest 1]: is going to hurt them in the short term. Yeah. I mean, apart from so traditionally where
[Guest 1]: the Chinese and the Pakistanis are working, so they work together. So the military aspect
[Guest 1]: of the relationship dominated the relationship until very recently. At the moment, what's
[Guest 1]: happened is that while there is CPEC, and all of the conversation is about CPEC, that
[Guest 1]: military-to-military engagement has expanded significantly. In the past, there was support
[Guest 1]: in Pakistan's nuclear program. But today, you're jointly developing jets, you're doing
[Guest 1]: submarine drills, you're expanding your theater of cooperation, now militarily, which doesn't
[Guest 1]: necessarily bode well for India. And India, which is anyway concerned about this idea
[Guest 1]: of the so-called string of pearls of Chinese ports all around us and Chinese potential
[Guest 1]: bases all around us. In Pakistan, you're certain that it's not just whether you get a formal
[Guest 1]: base or not in Gwadar, you are sufficiently sinicizing the Pakistani army in terms of
[Guest 1]: its equipment, which will mean that even in case of conflict, and there may not be a permanent
[Guest 1]: base over there, the possibilities for the Chinese to do soft basing very easily, repair,
[Guest 1]: maintenance, whatever they need in the Indian Ocean, if there's a conflict, they can easily
[Guest 1]: do it through Pakistan, even if Pakistan is not directly involved in the conflict. So
[Guest 1]: that embrace is getting closer. And that embrace is probably far more dangerous for us going
[Guest 1]: forward. And there's very little that we can do to contain that.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of, you know, I mean, obviously, in the last 10 years or so, our economy has grown
[Amit Varma]: significantly weaker since 2011, you know, starting with the disastrous economic policies
[Amit Varma]: of Pranab Mukherjee, and then following on the Modi administration, all through all of
[Amit Varma]: which I've discussed in various episodes, including Pooja Mehra, which are linked from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. But because of all of that, our general prosperity and all of that has
[Amit Varma]: gone down. And that is, of course, part of our foreign policy standing and the power
[Amit Varma]: that we can wield in the world. So taking all this into account, and also taking into
[Amit Varma]: account the changing currents and conflicts, which have been happening in the globe over
[Amit Varma]: the last 10 years, what are the sort of increased threats and opportunities that we have to
[Guest 2]: consider from a foreign policy perspective?
[Guest 2]: The increased threats are again, I would say that if we are thinking of India as a swing
[Guest 2]: power, the ability for us to hurt our adversaries is decreasing, our instruments that we have
[Guest 2]: available will decrease. So that is what is happening over the last few years because
[Guest 2]: of the economic slowdown. That means that we cannot take very strong actions against
[Guest 2]: China, even if they are not doing a reciprocal action, right. And they are antagonistic towards
[Guest 2]: us. There's little that we can do if we don't have the economic wherewithal. Those are the
[Guest 2]: threats. I don't think there are any opportunities of slowing economy at all.
[Guest 1]: I think, so I agree with Pranay that our ability to use those instruments will diminish, or
[Guest 1]: the capacity of those instruments will diminish. My sense is that, and my fear is this, that
[Guest 1]: fact might be obscured by the greater willingness of this administration to exercise what we
[Guest 1]: already command as power. And that's evident in what we've done with Malaysia right now,
[Guest 1]: where we decided to ban palm oil imports, because of statements made by the Malaysian
[Guest 1]: Prime Minister. The exercise of some of these things will, because of course, you do command
[Guest 1]: certain power, will obscure the fact that your power is diminishing relatively, and
[Guest 1]: because it pleases the domestic constituency. And I think that is a bigger fear that I have,
[Guest 1]: because that will sort of deviate away from the fact that we are actually losing out from
[Guest 1]: the fact that, okay, we've done this one good thing. And I don't think there's necessarily
[Guest 1]: even lessons being learned of how we are doing these things effectively, because when we
[Guest 1]: did this against Nepal a couple of years ago, within by the Modi government itself, it didn't
[Guest 1]: necessarily lead to the gains that we wanted to. We created a blockade, it actually ended
[Guest 1]: up, it actually ended up with us losing out in terms of our influence in Nepal and opening
[Guest 1]: the door for greater Chinese presence in the country. So I think, but the fact that we
[Guest 1]: exercised power was seen as something positive, which I think is problematic, because I don't
[Guest 1]: think that in itself should be seen as something positive, but it was sold as something positive,
[Guest 1]: right? Decisive government.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, but the hope is, you will see the consequences of that will be felt by the dispersed costs
[Guest 2]: of that will eventually add up, right? And that's what will change things.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, so I've taken more than two hours of your time. So to kind of end
[Amit Varma]: the episode and move away from foreign policy towards the foreign policy ecosystem. And
[Amit Varma]: my question here is at a general level, public intellectuals matter, because they shape the
[Amit Varma]: discourse, they seed ideas into the culture. And obviously, politics is a game of supply
[Amit Varma]: and demand in the political marketplace, the parties will respond to what the people want,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. Also, public intellectuals matter because they can shape the elites who
[Amit Varma]: actually hold some of the levers of government. What is it for public intellectuals like you
[Amit Varma]: guys working in foreign policy? Do you actually have any sort of influence? What is like the
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem for people like you? Do foreign policy professionals from across the world
[Amit Varma]: get together once in a while and form a community and cry on each other's shoulders? Give me
[Guest 2]: a sense of that.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I think that happens a lot in foreign policy. So for example, we are in India's
[Guest 2]: most globalized city in Bangalore, and we are connected to so many outside the government
[Guest 2]: also, there's a lot of people to people connections. So you end up exchanging a lot of notes, so
[Guest 2]: you will have visitors from Australia, US, China, even. So those kinds of exchanges do
[Guest 2]: happen and you talk about all these aspects. So that is one influence where you influence
[Guest 2]: the other nation states. Within the country itself now, any think tank in India, for example,
[Guest 2]: will generally have a foreign policy wing as well, I guess because again, domestic things
[Guest 2]: are too complicated. So people generally try to have foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: But is that a box to take? Or is it like, you know, a rich body of work also developing?
[Guest 2]: It is developing now. And there are a lot of good original studies coming up from Indian
[Guest 2]: think tanks as well. So that is another ecosystem that you are tapped into. Then with the government
[Guest 2]: itself, MEA has been compared to other ministries, it has been over the years, not just with
[Guest 2]: this government, it is a ministry which does exchange a lot of ideas from outside the government.
[Guest 2]: So there has been a lot of to and fro of ideas with them as well.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I mean, if you just go back a couple of weeks ago, you had Raisena Dialogues in
[Guest 1]: Delhi, massive event, mega event, a lot of the focus of strategic affairs, foreign affairs.
[Guest 1]: So it's a growing ecosystem in India, according to me, it's a growing ecosystem. There's interesting
[Amit Varma]: work also coming out. And it can be an influential ecosystem and
[Guest 1]: actual policy. Yeah, potentially, it can be an influential ecosystem. In fact, like when
[Guest 1]: I mentioned the MEA in the last couple of months, actually, in the last couple of years,
[Guest 1]: they appointed Ashok Malik as an external consultant. They've also put out requirements
[Guest 1]: for an external consultant specifically on China. So they have looked at expertise beyond
[Guest 1]: government, which is a good thing. In our engagement, what we realized is that if you
[Guest 1]: reach out, you tend to at least get heard. And increasingly, we felt that we're getting
[Guest 1]: heard, whether those things are being taken up or is another matter altogether. And there
[Guest 1]: are multiple interests that one needs to consider when before you take up a policy recommendation,
[Guest 1]: but at least the fact that somebody sitting across the table from you and engaging with
[Guest 1]: the ideas that you have, which might be very contrary to their institutional sort of, you
[Guest 1]: know, path dependence and their sense of, you know, where their government's interest
[Guest 1]: lies is a positive. So the first thing is that you start getting heard. And I think
[Guest 1]: that's happening. So I'm a little bit more optimistic on that. And I'm hopeful that as
[Guest 1]: the ecosystem grows bigger and potentially even grows a little bit louder, the fact that
[Guest 1]: there'll be diversity of voices will encourage a better debate and will make sure that government
[Guest 2]: actually listens to outside voices. Yeah, I think the most important role of the public
[Guest 2]: intellectual is the public part of it. So how much are we, the role in foreign policy
[Guest 2]: is also similar to be able to convey to a larger body of people why foreign relations
[Guest 2]: are important. How does economic growth have an impact on that? Those are important. So
[Guest 2]: for example, I tried to write a column in Hindi on a lot of foreign policy matters,
[Guest 2]: because I think we need to convey those ideas in as many languages. Otherwise, it will be
[Guest 2]: just seen as these bunch of people doing and for some, again, there is that insular tendency
[Guest 2]: in India as well, like in China, that why bother about those things, we have enough
[Guest 2]: problems of our own, we are such a big continent sized country, let's only do things here.
[Guest 2]: And we need to realize that foreign policy is also an instrument for us to grow, for
[Guest 2]: us to do well, for us to bring Yogakshema and that's why the public intellectual needs
[Amit Varma]: to be able to convey those ideas to a larger body of people. And on that hopeful note of
[Amit Varma]: Yogakshema, which I know we all aspire to, and I hope we all succeed in achieving. Thank
[Amit Varma]: you so much, guys, for coming on the show. And now let's get a quick update on what is
[Amit Varma]: happening with COVID-19. This update is being recorded on April 23. Pranay and Manoj, welcome
[Guest 2]: back.
[Guest 2]: Thanks, Amit. Good to be here in a new world.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, thanks, Amit. Good to be here and sharing heat in my house.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we are all in sharing heat because we have turned off the fan and sort of kindly
[Amit Varma]: bear with us if some outside noises do creep in. Pranay, I want to turn to you next. My
[Amit Varma]: assumption is that, you know, there is that old saying about there are years when nothing
[Amit Varma]: happens. And then there is a week when years happen. And clearly, I think the last few
[Amit Varma]: weeks have just changed the world entirely. Is that also true for foreign policy?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, thanks, Amit. I think, first of all, whatever sort of prognosis that we have now
[Guest 2]: is very tentative, right? Because the world is still evolving. And we don't know what's
[Guest 2]: going to happen next. But I was trying to look at, are there any frameworks through
[Guest 2]: which we can understand what might happen next? So from that perspective, yes, it looks
[Guest 2]: like there will be fundamental change in how geopolitics operates and also fundamental
[Guest 2]: change in how the geoeconomics of the world is operating. So in a sense, yes, I do see
[Guest 2]: a significant change coming to the world.
[Amit Varma]: And Manoj, at the heart of this has been a country that you know very deeply and have
[Amit Varma]: studied very carefully, which is China, you know, give me a little bit of that, not just
[Amit Varma]: from a foreign policy sense. But, you know, China is so opaque and so mysterious to outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of what's been happening there. Internally, how has it been, you know, affected
[Amit Varma]: internally as far as the politics and the society is concerned, and how that will then
[Amit Varma]: go on to impact the way they look at the world and the way the world looks at them?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think, I think there's been a sort of strange three, four months from their perspective
[Guest 1]: also. I mean, if you go back to January, one would have, you know, the way things were
[Guest 1]: happening in China, all the reportage was like, okay, this is a black swan event. And,
[Guest 1]: you know, Chinese politics have changed, there's fundamental insecurity in the country. Potentially,
[Guest 1]: the party would collapse. And this is the biggest test ever, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: And three months down the road, lo and behold, there's all this stuff about, I mean, The
[Guest 1]: Economist had a cover recently, which was about, has China already won? So it's quite
[Guest 1]: a strange turnaround in three, three and a half months of how this has played out. Domestically,
[Guest 1]: I think there's lots that, I mean, there's lots that's happening, which is uncovered.
[Guest 1]: So there's lots of public anger. There's lots of elite anger in China. We've seen that with
[Guest 1]: social media posts by say, people like Ran Zhejiang, or people like Xu Xiaorun. These
[Guest 1]: are people who sort of very publicly criticized Xi Jinping. And Xu Xiaorun is a professor
[Guest 1]: who's been a critic of Xi Jinping. Ran Zhejiang is among the elite. He's sort of a party tycoon.
[Guest 1]: And he sort of very publicly criticized Xi Jinping in a social media post calling him,
[Guest 1]: saying that the emperor clearly has no clothes. And all of these guys are now under so called
[Guest 1]: investigation. But it tells you that there is a pushback that's happening even among
[Guest 1]: the elite circles. And that doesn't tell you that Xi Jinping is going to lose control of the party,
[Guest 1]: or that the party is going to collapse. But it just tells you that there is a lot of churning
[Guest 1]: that's taking place within the party. In terms of the people of Wuhan, I mean, today in India,
[Guest 1]: we've been in lockdown for just about a month. And there's been tumult, there's been frustration,
[Guest 1]: there's been anger, there's been mishandling of certain things. Imagine in a place like Wuhan,
[Guest 1]: where the lockdown lasted for 76 days. Plus, you know, the fact that the government initially
[Guest 1]: failed to deal with the crisis, and that sense of anger of the number of deaths that have taken
[Guest 1]: place in that city in Hubei province. So there is a lot of anger in terms of what happened
[Guest 1]: initially, subsequently, what's going to happen with the economy, because clearly unemployment
[Guest 1]: and all that is going to rise. And also how the party sort of narrative has worked. I mean,
[Guest 1]: I'll give you one example of the sense of frustration. When the lockdown was about to
[Guest 1]: be lifted in Wuhan, which is in early April, you had an attempt by the local party leadership to
[Guest 1]: run something called a gratitude campaign, basically asking people to be thankful to
[Guest 1]: the party for saving them from this virus. It clearly did go down well with the people of Wuhan.
[Guest 1]: So it just tells you that there's a lot of churn. So some of the stuff about China winning is
[Guest 1]: premature. But it's also remarkable how from a point in sort of mid January, when we thought
[Guest 1]: that, okay, this might be the unravelling in some ways, and that was one of the perceptions
[Guest 1]: to today, the sense that, okay, China has recovered, it's reopening, and anger in the
[Guest 1]: world outside saying things like, how is that they've managed to control it while we are still
[Guest 1]: struggling, and that sort of playing out. So it's been an interesting couple of months for them.
[Guest 1]: And I think there's going to be lots of difficult times going ahead, even for them,
[Amit Varma]: just to recover from all of this. I'm a bit confused about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the narrative shift to China having won, because it would seem to me that there is
[Amit Varma]: across the world, a lot of anger at China, both in sort of at the level of the heads of government
[Amit Varma]: with the things that Trump says, etc. But also there is a lot of native anti Chinese sentiment
[Amit Varma]: coming out in various places, such as quite disturbingly in even India. And so what is the
[Amit Varma]: argument behind saying that this is a victory of some sort for China or enhances its nature in the
[Guest 1]: world? Yeah, I think the argument is essentially that the Chinese economy, if you look at even
[Guest 1]: IMF projections, China takes an economic hit, but the Chinese economy still continues to grow at
[Guest 1]: about 1.2% this year, whereas others take a deeper hit and the recovery next year, at least based on
[Guest 1]: IMF projections is to next year's growth target growth rate expectation is 9.2%. And this is all
[Guest 1]: obviously projections with lots of ifs and buts. But the assumption is that the Chinese have
[Guest 1]: started getting back to work, which people didn't think would have happened so soon.
[Guest 1]: And the challenge is that the rest of the world is right now facing. So that's one thing
[Guest 1]: is the economic challenge. So say from an Indian perspective, how we mitigate the challenge of the
[Guest 1]: economic slowdown that's going to come down the road would be determining where we eventually
[Guest 1]: stand globally. From the anger perspective, those things have to still play out. Despite the anger
[Guest 1]: in the US and despite the use of terms like Chinese virus and all of that, and even cases
[Guest 1]: being filed in the US against the Chinese government, China is still central to provision
[Guest 1]: of medical supplies, ventilators, masks, PPE. Even in the West, US governors have been signing deals
[Guest 1]: with Chinese entities and buying all of this. In Europe, they've been buying all of this.
[Guest 1]: There's been criticism of the poor quality of all of this. But the fact that China has been
[Guest 1]: has emerged as the center in terms of the heart of the manufacturing of all of this. And Xi Jinping
[Guest 1]: sort of captures this when he says that we need to build a health Silk Road as if we didn't have
[Guest 1]: enough Silk Roads. But it just tells you that they've tried to move in the center of the world
[Guest 1]: sort of in terms of manufacturing of some what's what's an essential supply. But there are challenges
[Guest 1]: to that. So I don't sort of agree with the narrative that the Chinese have won in any
[Guest 1]: which way. I think the narrative is not useful. But that's what's catching hold from that point
[Guest 1]: of view that you know, and it's largely because the fact that you've seen a recovery from what
[Guest 1]: one had anticipated in January, to what one is seeing today. And comparison what one had
[Guest 1]: anticipated in the world, nobody anticipated that this would be the state of the world.
[Guest 1]: But where the world is heading and particularly how the developed world, the Western world has
[Guest 1]: handled this pandemic, how the US has handled it, how your parts of Europe have handled it. That's
[Guest 1]: what's giving you the sense that the Chinese have managed to control this. And again, if you just
[Guest 1]: look at death tolls, now, nobody takes Chinese numbers on face value. But you know, the death
[Guest 1]: toll, if you compare it to what's happening in the US and what's happening in China, that those
[Guest 1]: sort of things make a difference in terms of how the public perception of all of this is playing
[Guest 1]: out. So I don't think the narrative is true, or is borne out by deeper consideration. And there's
[Guest 1]: lots of ifs and buts going down the road. What happens to supply chains in the future? Do companies
[Guest 1]: stay in China? What sort of restrictions come about in terms of global trade? All of that is
[Guest 1]: sort of play a role. But at the moment, just the fact that the Chinese have recovered, or seemingly
[Guest 1]: recovered with about 80 to 85% of, you know, factory activity, business activity, back to
[Guest 1]: somewhat normalcy. That's the kind of thing that's fueling this narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, earlier when we were chatting before the show, you mentioned how, you know, there are
[Amit Varma]: implications of COVID-19 across sort of two margins, and one is geopolitical, and one is
[Amit Varma]: geoeconomic. Can you shed some light on what you mean by these two terms? And, you know, what kind
[Guest 2]: of impacts you're looking at? Right. So when I'm talking about geopolitics, it's basically
[Guest 2]: the distribution of power across the world, right? Because we discussed earlier, how power is the
[Guest 2]: most important determinant in this amoral world of international relations. So the geopolitical axis
[Guest 2]: looks at how has the distribution of power changed because of what happened over the last two months,
[Guest 2]: right? So if you look at that, the overall understanding that we have currently is that
[Guest 2]: sort of COVID-19 accelerates the competition and confrontation between U.S. and China,
[Guest 2]: while simultaneously it reduces the absolute power of both of them, right? So what it means is that
[Guest 2]: U.S. and China will remain the two major poles even after what has happened, but their combined
[Guest 2]: leverage has sort of decreased because of what has happened, right? Both U.S. has been hit adversely,
[Guest 2]: and even China has been hit adversely. And even in the future, it's going to be difficult for
[Guest 2]: the economy to be up on its feet like the previous times. So it's going to hit both of them, okay?
[Guest 2]: So what it means is, essentially, there is also an opportunity for other powers now. So reduction
[Guest 2]: in the power of U.S. and China means that some other middle powers will be able to extract
[Guest 2]: some more concessions from either of them, right? So that is one more thing. It of course depends
[Guest 2]: on what those middle powers do internally and domestically, but there is an opportunity here.
[Guest 2]: Second, between U.S. and China itself, there is this confrontation which was going on is
[Guest 2]: likely to continue, right? We don't see the fact that U.S. and China will suddenly bury the hatchet
[Guest 2]: and then go on with this. So it might not lead to a direct war. So it is more like the last Cold War
[Guest 2]: which we had, where there was confrontation, competition, but there wasn't any exchange of
[Guest 2]: arms directly for extended periods of time, right? So that is more likely. The difference between
[Guest 2]: that Cold War and this one is that during that Cold War time, both the major powers, U.S. and
[Guest 2]: USSR were ascendant at that particular point of time when it started. But in this case, what you
[Guest 2]: see is both of the countries which are involved have been hit adversely. So their absolute power
[Guest 2]: has declined because of COVID-19. And that's where we call this the new Cold War.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So just to sort of, I want to like unpack one part of that a little bit. When you talk about
[Amit Varma]: the combined leverage of the USA and China decreasing because of COVID-19,
[Amit Varma]: one, is it then the case that somebody else's leverage increases? And two, if not, is it because
[Amit Varma]: that the world overall becomes a little more insular and a little less globalized because of
[Guest 2]: this? Yeah. So if you look at this from a power angle, it's the fact that because the absolute
[Guest 2]: powers of both U.S. and China decreases, it's not as if they can force a lot of other countries
[Guest 2]: to do whatever U.S. and China want. So in that sense, there might be some more bargaining power,
[Guest 2]: which the other countries have. Specifically, look at China as well. So we were talking about
[Guest 2]: the one big project that China has for the world is about the Belt and Road Initiative. And it
[Guest 2]: depends significantly on investing excess capacity abroad. Now, if it wants, with this COVID-19,
[Guest 2]: it would want to do that even more given the situation that China is in. But those powers
[Guest 2]: where it can invest now in these new circumstances has decreased even further, right? Because the
[Guest 2]: entire world is going through this, which means countries like India, countries which are
[Guest 2]: significantly big economic zones become even more important to China. So from that angle,
[Guest 2]: it's sort of bargaining power of some other middle powers who get things back up domestically
[Amit Varma]: correct. It improves a bit. Right. And Manoj, coming back to China, I mean, one sort of
[Amit Varma]: throwaway question I have here is that, how do they look at the pronouncements that come out of
[Amit Varma]: Trump's Twitter feed? I mean, do they just look at him as a loose cannon who they have to ignore
[Amit Varma]: and indulge while, you know, geopolitics proceeds along other lines, back channels? Or do Trump's
[Amit Varma]: do Trump's rants actually have a chance of making the relationship much worse? How does one handle
[Guest 1]: something like that? Yeah, no, I think, I think Trump has an impact. And I think the Chinese,
[Guest 1]: it's been four years, and I think they're still sort of trying to figure out where this man comes
[Guest 1]: from and what he does. I think the Twitter sort of, so for example, his use of the term Chinese
[Guest 1]: virus, it clearly hit a runoff. I don't think that there is any sort of two ways about it.
[Guest 1]: I think the sort of unpredictability, I think they've somewhere sort of gotten used to the
[Guest 1]: unpredictability of Trump. But I think this is going to be a difficult period to predict anything
[Guest 1]: even more so than the last three years. And that's because the US is heading into an election season.
[Guest 1]: So Trump is likely to be far more unhinged. And the Chinese are likely to be very sensitive to
[Guest 1]: this. And they're not likely to be sensitive in the context of just from the point of view that,
[Guest 1]: you know, diplomacy will continue, things will continue. But what sort of impact this has on
[Guest 1]: their domestic narrative? To me, I don't think that there is as much concern because the US
[Guest 1]: China relationship, although right now, as bad as it has ever been in the last 40 years, there's
[Guest 1]: still a baseline understanding that exists that, you know, yes, we can compete, but conflict is
[Guest 1]: not in anybody's interest. So at least they can take that as one thing away. So there's Trump's
[Guest 1]: pronouncements, Trump's unpredictability creates some tensions, specific tensions. But that's one
[Guest 1]: part of it. The broader tension would be what's happening at a bipartisan level in US. The fact
[Guest 1]: that Congress is getting even more aggressive, senators are getting even more aggressive.
[Guest 1]: There are many more legislations with regard to blocking Chinese companies. To me, that would be
[Guest 1]: that would be a greater concern for them in the long term. In the short term, I think diplomacy
[Guest 1]: will continue, they will continue to work together in whatever limited capacity that they are right
[Guest 1]: now. With regard to dealing with this pandemic, there's so much more that the US and China can do
[Guest 1]: and they're not doing because there is deep friction. There is a positive side to all of this
[Guest 1]: animosity with the US from a Chinese perspective to me. And that's how this plays out domestically.
[Guest 1]: So every time sort of Trump does something or the US pushes back on something, where it need not.
[Guest 1]: So for example, when China was caught in this racism scandal with Africa over the last couple
[Guest 1]: of weeks, they were digging themselves deeper. And it's the moment the Americans got involved
[Guest 1]: in the State Department issued a statement saying, unfortunately, the xenophobia is coming
[Guest 1]: from China, and so on and so forth. You saw the Chinese pivot on the narrative and say,
[Guest 1]: well, look, this is these Americans are trying to sort of drive a wedge between us and the Africans.
[Guest 1]: And that's the narrative that is sold in Africa. Now, it's not like the African states that were
[Guest 1]: concerned about racism by that narrative, but it has an impact on public perception also.
[Guest 1]: Given, you know, the Trump's record in Africa is not great. He's famous for calling him calling
[Guest 1]: the African countries along with others, shithole countries. So I don't think it necessarily,
[Guest 1]: you know, it helps the Chinese from a propaganda purposes in some of these cases and also
[Guest 1]: domestically, because then you can ask people to rally around the party in a sort of nationalistic
[Guest 1]: power, given that the US is acting this way against you. But at an international level,
[Guest 1]: it causes disruptions, it causes disruptions in terms of what more can be done to, you know,
[Guest 1]: deal with the pandemic. So it limits cooperation. That's to me, that's the sort of Trump effect.
[Guest 1]: But the deeper concern is with regard to what's happening in US polity with regard to China,
[Guest 1]: the fact that different states are filing cases against the Chinese government, the fact that
[Guest 1]: at a bipartisan level, Congress is pushing through new legislation to restrict business and trade
[Guest 1]: with China. Those are the kind of things that will outlast Trump. And I think that would be
[Guest 1]: their bigger concern. That's how sort of I would look at what's happening in that relationship.
[Guest 2]: And Manoj, there is China's own version of aggressive Twitter diplomacy as well,
[Guest 2]: right, which has taken sort of bigger shape during these times.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I mean, yeah, I mean, the term for all of that is wolf warrior diplomacy, right,
[Guest 1]: coming from the movie Wolf Warrior, which is a terrible movie. And I suffered through it.
[Guest 1]: But if you sort of the idea that, you know, Chinese diplomats and Chinese foreign ministry
[Guest 1]: spokesperson are going to be far more aggressive on social media, they're going to peddle conspiracy
[Guest 1]: theories, and do much more of that and be far more combative. Some of that really actually
[Guest 1]: falls flat, and they sort of land themselves in far greater problems. But the fact that the US
[Guest 1]: response, often with even more provocative, unpredictable nonsense, where it can actually
[Guest 1]: let the Chinese sort of tie themselves up in knots. That's where I think the problem sort of
[Guest 1]: is in the way that's playing out either neither side is doing each other a favor by doing that,
[Guest 1]: you know, they're doing themselves a favor by doing that. They're actually helping domestic
[Guest 1]: nationalists forward in each side, which is, you know, probably helps at domestic politics level,
[Guest 1]: but actually constrains any sort of cooperative, you know, constructive movement forward.
[Guest 1]: And I think that's the bigger threat to me at the moment than conflict, because I think both
[Guest 1]: sides understand that conflict would be deeply damaging. And, you know, speaking of domestic
[Amit Varma]: politics, one trend that's, of course, been happening over the last few years, and will
[Amit Varma]: probably be exacerbated by this is the rise of economic nationalism. And Pranay, you were
[Amit Varma]: mentioning earlier about how, you know, this is something that has an impact on the liberal
[Amit Varma]: economic order. Can you expand on that a little bit? Yeah, so the second axis of the New World
[Guest 2]: Order, which we were talking about, one was geopolitics, the second one is geoeconomics,
[Guest 2]: right? That talks about what will be the general trends in economic relationships between countries,
[Guest 2]: right? And on that, I think COVID-19 will have a much more significant impact. And let's see
[Guest 2]: what's happening in that world, right? First, we are already sort of entering into a global
[Guest 2]: recession phase in the short run. And a lot of people believe that a V-shaped recovery, which
[Guest 2]: macroeconomists keep talking about is quite unlikely, right? So you will still have,
[Guest 2]: over the next few couple of years, at least even if we don't have a recession, we'll have a secular
[Guest 2]: stagnation of sorts. And we are going to be, it's going to be quite some time before we go back to
[Guest 2]: consumption and production levels like we had before COVID, right? So that is one sort of a
[Guest 2]: big trend. The second one is just the fact that international labor mobility will drop significantly,
[Guest 2]: right? Already all travel is stopped. So, and US stopped immigration, right? A couple of days back.
[Guest 2]: So we might say that it's happening only for the time being, but this will have some
[Guest 2]: impact for the long-term foreign policies of these countries as well. So there will be some
[Guest 2]: inertia for these countries to get back to the old days, right? So international labor mobility
[Guest 2]: has decreased. Large capital flows now will be restricted to only relatively high performing
[Guest 2]: and high return yielding countries, right? Because now no one has excess capital. They would want to
[Guest 2]: be very judicious with what the capital they have, right? So that is one thing. And then good
[Guest 2]: and services trade between the countries in the, with the US and the countries aligned with China,
[Guest 2]: that might decrease somewhat if this sort of confrontation increases. So that is why I was
[Guest 2]: saying that the liberal economic order, which was underpinned by these three things, right?
[Guest 2]: The free movement of labor, capital, goods, services, that is sort of going to take a setback.
[Guest 2]: The third angle that I see coming from all this is just this whole idea of economic nationalism
[Guest 2]: and already people are using, scarily using these terms like de-globalization, etc, right? So
[Guest 2]: what we might see is that until now there was this consensus that corporates and global
[Guest 2]: manufacturing can happen anywhere in the world. It's fine because the supply chains will sort
[Guest 2]: out things for themselves. We will produce according to our comparative advantage and
[Guest 2]: we'll be all right. But now look at this after COVID-19, many nation states might do a hard
[Guest 2]: rethink on this. So they might think that global manufacturing should move away from this
[Guest 2]: just-in-time kind of thinking to just-in-case type of thinking, right? Which means they are
[Guest 2]: going to plan for contingencies. They are going to plan for a repeat of what has happened now.
[Guest 2]: So they are going to try and build some redundancy in these supply chains, right? Which means they
[Guest 2]: are going to instruct some companies to do local sourcing. They are going to have more industrial
[Guest 2]: policy regimes, tougher tariff regimes. We might even see more restricted trade agreements. So this
[Guest 2]: is what is a sorry picture actually, but we are sort of heading towards that trend in the economic
[Amit Varma]: space. Yeah, it's a very scary picture and it totally, you know, goes against the concept of
[Amit Varma]: Yogakshema, which you guys expounded upon so well in the part that we recorded in January, which
[Amit Varma]: brings me to my next question, which is about India. Like where is India in all of this? How
[Amit Varma]: has our outlook changed? Like one, we've had a completely random and unrelated to COVID
[Amit Varma]: sort of pushback from, you know, the Arab states about some of the anti-Muslim sentiments
[Amit Varma]: expressed by some of our leaders here, which is very interesting to me. And I'll ask you about
[Amit Varma]: what you guys feel about that. But also in a larger sense, how is India's foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: impacted? Does the diminished leverage of the USA and China mean that India can play
[Amit Varma]: a greater part or has the incident like, you know, Trump's threat to India about the supply of
[Amit Varma]: hydroxychloroquine, which of course it seems from recent tests doesn't even work on this
[Amit Varma]: particular disease, has that sort of diminished India standing in the world because Modi had to
[Guest 2]: cave in so easily? So what do you guys feel? Yeah, on that hydroxychloroquine thing, I
[Guest 2]: I don't think that is any indication of the larger foreign policy interests or the direction
[Guest 2]: of India's foreign policy, right? I mean, in fact, it is in our national interest to be able to
[Guest 2]: help the US on this counter. Now we know that maybe that product even doesn't help. But anyways,
[Guest 2]: if the US was requiring this and if India is providing it, it is in our interest. So I don't
[Guest 2]: think that has sort of it gets played up a lot because of Modi caved in to Donald Trump. But we
[Guest 2]: are looking at US and India's national interest. And there I don't think these the small thing has
[Guest 2]: a really big implication. Now coming to the larger picture, yeah, as a middle power, which
[Guest 2]: will still be probably one of the few countries which will still have a positive growth rate
[Guest 2]: might. OK, we don't know about that. But that is why many countries will still want to look at
[Guest 2]: India, will turn to India. Even the big thing that opportunity lies is, for example, I talked
[Guest 2]: about how global manufacturing might want to move away from China, build some redundancies.
[Guest 2]: So that is one opportunity for India, you know, to focus on attracting companies which are
[Guest 2]: currently manufacturing in China. And to sort a lot of that, we need to actually get things
[Guest 2]: all done well back home. So, for example, we need to get logistics right. We need to
[Guest 2]: actually transition to a low import duty regime now because global firms, if they said shop here,
[Guest 2]: they would still want to source things from various other parts. So we want to help them
[Guest 2]: in that process. So there are a lot of these opportunities. If you want, we can discuss
[Guest 2]: more about them. But it all depends on the things that India does domestically to be able to take
[Guest 2]: opportunity of the fact that US and China will both be declined somewhat because of COVID-19.
[Guest 1]: If I can add to that, I mean, yeah, a lot of what India's foreign policy and how India's
[Guest 1]: stature globally, how we emerge out of all of this depends on how we manage the economic fallout and
[Guest 1]: how quickly we recover and how well we recover. But from the point of view of, you know, what
[Guest 1]: happens to the relationship with China, I mean, our view is that, look, there's going to be more
[Guest 1]: of the same, more of the same dynamic that's going to play out that's existed. So there's
[Guest 1]: no fundamental shifting of the dynamic that existed. The fact that China and the US are
[Guest 1]: going to be at each other's throats without entering conflict creates opportunities for
[Guest 1]: us, right? Because as a middle power, you can sort of bargain with both of them because, you know,
[Guest 1]: both of them want you, to put it very crudely, in their camp. I mean, India is never going to be in
[Guest 1]: China's camp, but at least the best that Beijing can hope for is that, you know, you're non-aligned
[Guest 1]: in a more true sense of the phrase than, say, in the past. And that is what they would at least
[Guest 1]: look for. And Beijing would also want stability. You don't necessarily want conflict because there's
[Guest 1]: lots of churn happening. So in that sense, there is an opportunity for India. But the flip side is
[Guest 1]: that because Sino-US competition becomes far stronger and far deeper, there's a risk. And the
[Guest 1]: risk is that China already is quite sensitive to sort of India's relationship with the US. So
[Guest 1]: anytime sort of India even talks about the Indo-Pacific or freedom of navigation or anything
[Guest 1]: like that, you see sort of a reaction from Beijing. Anytime you see something, you know,
[Guest 1]: this talk of, you know, the Quad having a meeting or a particular joint maritime drill between
[Guest 1]: India, the US, Japan and Australia, which has so far not happened. But anytime you have that sort
[Guest 1]: of a conversation, you'll see a reaction from Beijing. And anytime you see India sort of
[Guest 1]: drifting closer, you see some sort of tensions emerging. There's no direct sort of causation,
[Guest 1]: but these sort of things happen, that you see tensions on the LAC, on the boundary with China.
[Guest 1]: So my sense is that going forward, what you're going to see is that because this competition
[Guest 1]: between China and the US becomes deeper and friction becomes far more intensified, you will
[Guest 1]: end up seeing China becoming increasingly more sensitive to anything that India does. So just to
[Guest 1]: sort of simple example, in the last 10 days, you've seen India impose some sort of restrictions
[Guest 1]: on FDI essentially from China, although the notification talks about countries sharing
[Guest 1]: land borders with India, but it's basically China. At the same time, you've seen a deal
[Guest 1]: that's happened between Jio and Facebook. And that's sort of stuff that you will see. You saw
[Guest 1]: the outrage in India over HDFC, sort of People's Bank of China's increase of stake in HDFC. Even
[Guest 1]: that sort of a shift, how that gets perceived in Beijing would be largely in the context of,
[Guest 1]: well, okay, India is picking sides. And the sensitivity to all that will increase. And
[Guest 1]: that then creates volatility in that relationship. So that's how some bit of the geopolitics I sort
[Amit Varma]: of see playing out going forward. And sort of leaving these major powers aside for a while,
[Amit Varma]: which is the USA, the Middle Kingdom and the middle power, as you put it, how does one look at
[Amit Varma]: those institutions, like the the United Nations and like WHO, those international institutions,
[Amit Varma]: which sort of straddle geopolitical boundaries? How are they impacted? Is their influence and
[Amit Varma]: credibility diminished by what has just happened? You know, how will that change going forward?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, on the UN side, already, the UN was a project which was quite on its death row,
[Guest 2]: sort of so. And with this, and the whole role of World Health Organization and how it sort of
[Guest 2]: played quite a disturbing role in all this in the initial phase has sort of taken the sheen of some
[Guest 2]: of these multilateral organizations. But that does not mean that multilateral institutions will end.
[Guest 2]: Probably what we might see is that we might see a new kind of multilateralism, which means that
[Guest 2]: we won't have one global body, but we might have some multilateral institutions which are
[Guest 2]: centered around China. And we might have some other multilateral institutions which continue
[Guest 2]: to be centered around the US. So those sort of become the more important organizations for
[Guest 2]: transnational cooperation, rather than one body like the UN and UN as a world government,
[Guest 2]: all those ideas sort of go away when we are talking about so much of economic nationalism,
[Guest 2]: and we are talking about a world in which labor mobility and all will decrease.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think, so I agree with Pranay. I mean, I think, so John Mearsham sort of captures that
[Guest 1]: when he says things like you're likely to see bounded orders, which are led by either the US,
[Guest 1]: China or somebody else. So you'll see some of these other groupings. But at the same time,
[Guest 1]: my sense is that you won't necessarily see, there are some challenges which even transcend some of
[Guest 1]: these bounded orders. COVID is one such challenge. So is climate change. And I think you're going to
[Guest 1]: see greater diversity. So you're going to see more of these multilateral organizations headed
[Guest 1]: by certain, largely led by certain countries, but also you're going to see certain organizations
[Guest 1]: which will require something greater than these bounded orders for people to work together on.
[Guest 1]: I don't know how that plays out. But that's my sense that you will still, given the nature of
[Guest 1]: this particular challenge, my hope is that states gradually sort of look past and say, okay, look,
[Guest 1]: on the economy, I might need to have the circle of trust. And therefore that is bounded by certain
[Guest 1]: things. So the WTO might not be as effective, as opposed to another sort of bounded institution,
[Guest 1]: which has say, trust states that have greater trust among each other, or whether it's say the
[Guest 1]: Western States, Western Europe, US, Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand. But on climate
[Guest 1]: change, I need something greater. So therefore, some of these broader institutions might actually
[Guest 1]: survive and thrive, but their mandate might shift. Yeah, I actually think that action on climate
[Guest 2]: change is going to slow down because of all this more friction. So collaboration on all this
[Guest 2]: building trust is going to become more difficult. So yeah, we require a transnational world
[Guest 2]: cooperation on that front, but that becomes more difficult with what has happened.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So my sort of final question to you, you guys is a two part question and perhaps
[Amit Varma]: predictable, which is that, okay, right now, we are sort of in a fog of war in terms of
[Amit Varma]: information, there is an epistemic fog, we don't really have a clear sense of what is happening,
[Amit Varma]: what is happening, which strategy is best to deal with COVID-19, where different countries are
[Amit Varma]: trying different levels of lockdowns or no lockdown, we don't know what the final impact will
[Amit Varma]: be, we don't know the mortality rate, we don't know how widespread this will be and when we will
[Amit Varma]: come out of it, right. So a lot of unknown unknowns ahead as well. So sort of looking to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as little as two years in the future, could you articulate what would be your worst case
[Amit Varma]: scenario and your best case scenarios? And we can start with you, Pranay. Yeah, sort of the
[Guest 2]: worst case scenario is that we actually end in this world where there is the global recession
[Guest 2]: sort of continues for a long time. And because of that, you know, there is even more confrontation,
[Guest 2]: there is less mobility, even COVID-19 sort of continues for a longer time. So that sort of
[Guest 2]: blocks all our pathways to get back to any sense of normalcy. So that is sort of the worst scenario.
[Guest 2]: And the accompanying thing would be India actually responds to all this by using more economic
[Guest 2]: nationalism, by undergoing domestic strife, etc, right. So that is sort of the absolute worst case
[Guest 2]: scenario that I can think. But the positive scenario would be that maybe we get over this,
[Guest 2]: not a V-shaped recovery, but even if it is a delayed V-shaped recovery and India is able to
[Guest 2]: use this opportunity, this moment to do some of the reforms, which it anyways had to do from a
[Guest 2]: long time. So that might help. You know, so there is a very interesting concept on this called
[Guest 2]: two level games, the idea being that this was a paper by Robert Putnam, which said that
[Guest 2]: actually international negotiations don't happen at the level of two negotiators talking itself,
[Guest 2]: but they also happen at two levels in the sense that the negotiator talks to the other country
[Guest 2]: and the negotiator also has to talk to their domestic constituency, right. So now the fact
[Guest 2]: that we had to do all these reforms on the economic side, some of them can't be done now,
[Guest 2]: for example, the labor reforms can't be done, but land reforms can still be done in these
[Guest 2]: situations. So we can use this level one situation, which is quite bad to sell the
[Guest 2]: reforms at level two and to convince people, the domestic stakeholders, that if we don't get things
[Guest 2]: right at this point of time, we are going to have a really tough time and there's no way out,
[Guest 2]: right. So this is that moment. And if we are able to utilize that, we might see a more positive
[Guest 1]: and stronger India coming out of it. From my point of view, the worst case scenario would be,
[Guest 1]: you know, things open up and you have repeated and recurrent waves of infection, which,
[Guest 1]: you know, completely stop any sort of social sort of society getting back together and
[Guest 1]: that then eventually leads to greater, you know, reactionary tendencies among states
[Guest 1]: within sort of countries. So for example, you see much more economic nationalism,
[Guest 1]: you see something that's happened in Hungary, where essentially all individual rights,
[Guest 1]: sort of, you know, systems, democratic systems get sort of completely undermined
[Guest 1]: and you have dictatorships or you have at least so-called strongmen leaders even consolidating
[Guest 1]: far greater power and checks and balances get eroded in the name of national sort of revival
[Guest 1]: and that happening in different parts of the world, including in India. Another thing is that
[Guest 1]: essentially when something like that happens, you end up seeing a complete erosion of this
[Guest 1]: concept of individual rights where states sort of continue to sort of overstretch into private lives.
[Guest 1]: You see an erosion of privacy through technology interventions. At the moment, all of us are
[Guest 1]: talking about the use of apps and things like that and the use of technology to do contact
[Guest 1]: tracing, to track people and do all of that. But where does this leave the idea of privacy
[Guest 1]: and individual privacy going forward? Do these sort of, how is this data stored and all of that?
[Guest 1]: And all of those sorts of things continue to become the new normal for individuals and eventually
[Guest 1]: sort of conflict, so conflict between states, conflict between the U.S. and China. At the moment,
[Guest 1]: I mean, when you hear the narrative of somebody like Lindsey Graham in the U.S. saying things like
[Guest 1]: China is responsible for 30-40,000 American deaths, directly responsible, and as that narrative sort
[Guest 1]: of takes hold, while, you know, there is better sense that exists at the moment, how things shape
[Guest 1]: up, one doesn't know. So my sense would be that those would be my worst case outcomes.
[Guest 1]: In terms of the best case outcomes, you know, part of it is nature. Hopefully, you know,
[Guest 1]: we develop the kind of immunity that is needed. Hopefully, you know, the nature of the virus is
[Guest 1]: actually not as bad. Data right now tells us that, you know, a large majority of cases are
[Guest 1]: asymptomatic and they don't necessarily, you know, have any sort of adverse impacts on people.
[Guest 1]: So actually, you know, the actual death toll and case load is not as bad. And people can get back
[Guest 1]: to work as quickly as possible. Life can get back to some degree of normalcy as quickly as possible.
[Guest 1]: We hopefully develop a vaccine within the next year. So people have been saying 12 to 18 months
[Guest 1]: for now, three, four months. So hopefully, within the time frame, you actually get a vaccine and it
[Guest 1]: can be administered mass-based. So things can get back to some degree of normalcy within a year and
[Guest 1]: a half or so. And that, you know, the international order doesn't necessarily get as undermined. I
[Guest 1]: mean, de-globalization, perhaps it will happen, but it happens in a sense that select sectors are
[Guest 1]: seen as far more important from national security point of view. But otherwise, you have trade,
[Guest 1]: which assumes, you know, those ideas of free trade don't necessarily go away. So that would be my
[Guest 1]: first, that would be my best case scenario where at least things come back to somewhat normalcy.
[Guest 1]: There's a new normal, but the new normal is not as bad as it can be. And the idea of international
[Guest 1]: institutions still being needed and states still needing to work together sort of survives this
[Amit Varma]: pandemic. On that hopeful note, thanks so much guys for joining me again. I mean, this of course
[Amit Varma]: was remote and I hope at some point we can again sit in the same studio and record together. So
[Amit Varma]: have a good lockdown. Thank you. Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai